Children of Dune
Frank Herbert

Copyright 1976

Muad'Dib's teachings have become the playground of scholastics, of the superstitious and the corrupt. He taught a balanced way of life, a philosophy with which a human can meet problems arising from an ever-changing universe. He said humankind is still evolving, in a process which will never end. He said this evolution moves on changing principles which are known only to eternity. How can corrupted reasoning play with such an essence?
-Words of the Mentat Duncan Idaho

    A spot of light appeared on the deep red rug which covered the raw rock of the cave floor. The light glowed without apparent source, having its existence only on the red fabric surface woven of spice fiber. A questing circle about two centimeters in diameter, it moved erratically -- now elongated, now an oval. Encountering the deep green side of a bed, it leaped upward, folded itself across the bed's surface.
    Beneath the green covering lay a child with rusty hair, face still round with baby fat, a generous mouth -- a figure lacking the lean sparseness of Fremen tradition, but not as water-fat as an off-worlder. As the light passed across closed eyelids, the small figure stirred. The light winked out.
    Now there was only the sound of even breathing and, faint behind it, a reassuring drip-drip-drip of water collecting in a catch basin from the windstill far above the cave.
    Again the light appeared in the chamber -- slightly larger, a few lumens brighter. This time there was a suggestion of source and movement to it: a hooded figure filled the arched doorway at the chamber's edge and the light originated there. Once more the light flowed around the chamber, testing, questing. There was a sense of menace in it, a restless dissatisfaction. It avoided the sleeping child, paused on the gridded air inlet at an upper corner, probed a bulge in the green and gold wall hangings which softened the enclosing rock.
    Presently the light winked out. The hooded figure moved with a betraying swish of fabric, took up a station at one side of the arched doorway. Anyone aware of the routine here in Sietch Tabr would have suspected at once that this must be Stilgar, Naib of the Sietch, guardian of the orphaned twins who would one day take up the mantle of their father, Paul Muad'Dib. Stilgar often made night inspections of the twins' quarters, always going first to the chamber where Ghanima slept and ending here in the adjoining room, where he could reassure himself that Leto was not threatened. 
    I'm an old fool, Stilgar thought.
    He fingered the cold surface of the light projector before restoring it to the loop in his belt sash. The projector irritated him even while he depended upon it. The thing was a subtle instrument of the Imperium, a device to detect the presence of large living bodies. It had shown only the sleeping children in the royal bedchambers.
    Stilgar knew his thoughts and emotions were like the light. He could not still a restless inner projection. Some greater power controlled that movement. It projected him into this moment where he sensed the accumulated peril. Here lay the magnet for dreams of grandeur throughout the known universe. Here lay temporal riches, secular authority and that most powerful of all mystic talismans: the divine authenticity of Muad'Dib's religious bequest. In these twins -- Leto and his sister Ghanima -- an awesome power focused. While they lived, Muad'Dib, though dead, lived in them.
    These were not merely nine-year-old children; they were a natural force, objects of veneration and fear. They were the children of Paul Atreides, who had become Muad'Dib, the Mahdi of all the Fremen. Muad'Dib had ignited an explosion of humanity; Fremen had spread from this planet in a jihad, carrying their fervor across the human universe in a wave of religious government whose scope and ubiquitous authority had left its mark on every planet.
    Yet these children of Muad'Dib are flesh and blood, Stilgar thought. Two simple thrusts of my knife would still their hearts. Their water would return to the tribe.
    His wayward mind fell into turmoil at such a thought. 
    To kill Muad'Dib's children!
    But the years had made him wise in introspection. Stilgar knew the origin of such a terrible thought. It came from the left hand of the damned, not from the right hand of the blessed. The ayat and burhan of Life held few mysteries for him. Once he'd been proud to think of himself as Fremen, to think of the desert as a friend, to name his planet Dune in his thoughts and not Arrakis, as it was marked on all of the Imperial star charts.
    How simple things were when our Messiah was only a dream, he thought. By finding our Mahdi we loosed upon the universe countless messianic dreams. Every people subjugated by the jihad now dreams of a leader to come.
    Stilgar glanced into the darkened bedchamber.
    If my knife liberated all of those people, would they make a messiah of me?
    Leto could be heard stirring restlessly in his bed.
    Stilgar sighed. He had never known the Atreides grandfather whose name this child had taken. But many said the moral strength of Muad'Dib had come from that source. Would that terrifying quality of rightness skip a generation now? Stilgar found himself unable to answer this question.
    He thought: Sietch Tabr is mine. I rule here. I am a Naib of the Fremen. Without me there would have been no Muad'Dib. These twins, now . . . through Chani, their mother and my kinswoman, my blood flows in their veins, I am there with Muad'Dib and Chani and all the others. What have we done to our universe?
    Stilgar could not explain why such thoughts came to him in the night and why they made him feel so guilty. He crouched within his hooded robe. Reality was not at all like the dream. The Friendly Desert, which once had spread from pole to pole, was reduced to half its former size. The mythic paradise of spreading greenery filled him with dismay. It was not like the dream. And as his planet changed, he knew he had changed. He had become a far more subtle person than the one-time sietch chieftain. He was aware now of many things -- of statecraft and profound consequences in the smallest decisions. Yet he felt this knowledge and subtlety as a thin veneer covering an iron core of simpler, more deterministic awareness. And that older core called out to him, pleaded with him for a return to cleaner values.
    The morning sounds of the sietch began intruding upon his thoughts. People were beginning to move about in the cavern. He felt a breeze against his cheeks: people were going out through the doorseals into the predawn darkness. The breeze spoke of carelessness as it spoke of the time. Warren dwellers no longer maintained the tight water discipline of the old days. Why should they, when rain had been recorded on this planet, when clouds were seen, when eight Fremen had been inundated and killed by a flash flood in a wadi? Until that event, the word drowned had not existed in the language of Dune. But this was no longer Dune; this was Arrakis . . . and it was the morning of an eventful day.
    He thought: Jessica, mother of Muad'Dib and grandmother of these royal twins, returns to our planet today. Why does she end her self-imposed exile at this time? Why does she leave the softness and security of Caladan for the dangers of Arrakis?
    And there were other worries: Would she sense Stilgar's doubts? She was a Bene Gesserit witch, graduate of the Sisterhood's deepest training, and a Reverend Mother in her own right. Such females were acute and they were dangerous. Would she order him to fall upon his own knife as the Umma-Protector of Liet-Kynes had been ordered?
    Would I obey her? he wondered.
    He could not answer that question, but now he thought about Liet-Kynes, the planetologist who had first dreamed of transforming the planetwide desert of Dune into the human-supportive green planet which it was becoming. Liet-Kynes had been Chani's father. Without him there would have been no dream, no Chani, no royal twins. The workings of this fragile chain dismayed Stilgar.
    How have we met in this place? he asked himself. How have we combined? For what purpose? Is it my duty to end it all, to shatter that great combination?
    Stilgar admitted the terrible urging within him now. He could make that choice, denying love and family to do what a Naib must do on occasion: make a deadly decision for the good of the tribe. By one view, such a murder represented ultimate betrayal and atrocity. To kill mere children! Yet they were not mere children. They had eaten melange, had shared in the sietch orgy, had probed the desert for sandtrout and played the other games of Fremen children . . . And they sat in the Royal Council. Children of such tender years, yet wise enough to sit in the Council. They might be children in flesh, but they were ancient in experience, born with a totality of genetic memory, a terrifying awareness which set their Aunt Alia and themselves apart from all other living humans.
    Many times in many nights had Stilgar found his mind circling this difference shared by the twins and their aunt; many times had he been awakened from sleep by these torments, coming here to the twins' bedchambers with his dreams unfinished. Now his doubts came to focus. Failure to make a decision was in itself a decision -- he knew this. These twins and their aunt had awakened in the womb, knowing there all of the memories passed onto them by their ancestors. Spice addiction had done this, spice addiction of the mothers -- the Lady Jessica and Chani. The Lady Jessica had borne a son, Muad'Dib before her Addiction. Alia had come after the addiction. That was clear in retrospect. The countless generations of selective breeding directed by the Bene Gesserits had achieved Muad'Dib, but nowhere in the Sisterhood's plans had they allowed for melange. Oh, they knew about this possibility, but they feared it and called it Abomination. That was the most dismaying fact. Abomination. They must possess reasons for such a judgment. And if they said Alia was an Abomination, then that must apply equally to the twins, because Chani, too, had been addicted, her body saturated with spice, and her genes had somehow complemented those of Muad'Dib.
    Stilgar's thoughts moved in ferment. There could be no doubt these twins went beyond their father. But in which direction? The boy spoke of an ability to be his father -- and had proved it. Even as an infant, Leto had revealed memories which only Muad'Dib should have known. Were there other ancestors waiting in that vast spectrum of memories -- ancestors whose beliefs and habits created unspeakable dangers for living humans?
    Abominations, the holy witches of the Bene Gesserit said. Yet the Sisterhood coveted the genophase of these children. The witches wanted sperm and ovum without the disturbing flesh which carried them. Was that why the Lady Jessica returned at this time? She had broken with the Sisterhood to support her Ducal mate, but rumor said she had returned to the Bene Gesserit ways.
    I could end all of these dreams, Stilgar thought. How simple it would be.
    And yet again he wondered at himself that he could contemplate such a choice. Were Muad'Dib's twins responsible for the reality which obliterated the dreams of others? No. They were merely the lens through which light poured to reveal new shapes in the universe.
    In torment, his mind reverted to primary Fremen beliefs, and he thought: God's command comes; so seek not to hasten it. God's it is to show the way; and some do swerve from it.
    It was the religion of Muad'Dib which upset Stilgar most. Why did they make a god of Muad'Dib? Why deify a man known to be flesh? Muad'Dib's Golden Elixir of Life had created a bureaucratic monster which sat astride human affairs. Government and religion united, and breaking a law became sin. A smell of blasphemy arose like smoke around any questioning of governmental edicts. The guilt of rebellion invoked hellfire and self-righteous judgments. 
    Yet it was men who created these governmental edicts.
    Stilgar shook his head sadly, not seeing the attendants who had moved into the Royal Antechamber for their morning duties.
    He fingered the crysknife at his waist, thinking of the past it symbolized, thinking that more than once he had sympathized with rebels whose abortive uprisings had been crushed by his own orders. Confusion washed through his mind and he wished he knew how to obliterate it, returning to the simplicities represented by the knife. But the universe would not turn backward. It was a great engine projected upon the grey void of nonexistence. His knife, if it brought the deaths of the twins, would only reverberate against that void, weaving new complexities to echo through human history, creating new surges of chaos, inviting humankind to attempt other forms of order and disorder.
    Stilgar sighed, growing aware of the movements around him. Yes, these attendants represented a kind of order which was bound around Muad'Dib's twins. They moved from one moment to the next, meeting whatever necessities occurred there. Best to emulate them, Stilgar told himself. Best meet what comes when it comes.
    I am an attendant yet, he told himself. And my master is God the Merciful, the Compassionate. And he quoted to himself: "Surely, We have put on their necks fetters up to the chin, so their heads are raised; and We have put before them a barrier and behind them a barrier; and We have covered them, so they do not see."
    Thus was it written in the old Fremen religion. 
    Stilgar nodded to himself.
    To see, to anticipate the next moment as Muad'Dib had done with his awesome visions of the future, added a counterforce to human affairs. It created new places for decisions. To be unfettered, yes, that might well indicate a whim of God. Another complexity beyond ordinary human reach.
    Stilgar removed his hand from the knife. His fingers tingled with remembrance of it. But the blade which once had glistened in a sandworm's gaping mouth remained in its sheath. Stilgar knew he would not draw this blade now to kill the twins. He had reached a decision. Better to retain that one old virtue which he still cherished: loyalty. Better the complexities one thought he knew than the complexities which defied understanding. Better the now than the future of a dream. The bitter taste in his mouth told Stilgar how empty and revolting some dreams could be.
    No! No more dreams!

= = = = = =

CHALLENGE: "Have you seen The Preacher?" 
RESPONSE: "I have seen a sandworm."
CHALLENGE: "What about that sandworm?" 
RESPONSE: "It gives us the air we breathe."
CHALLENGE: "Then why do we destroy its land?" 
RESPONSE: "Because Shai-Hulud [sandworm deified] orders it."
-Riddles of Arrakis by Harq al-Ada

    As was the Fremen custom, the Atreides twins arose an hour before dawn. They yawned and stretched in secret unison in their adjoining chambers, feeling the activity of the cave-warren around them. They could hear attendants in the antechamber preparing breakfast, a simple gruel with dates and nuts blended in liquid skimmed from partially fermented spice. There were glowglobes in the antechamber and a soft yellow light entered through the open archways of the bedchambers. The twins dressed swiftly in the soft light, each hearing the other nearby. As they had agreed, they donned stillsuits against the desert's parching winds.
    Presently the royal pair met in the antechamber, noting the sudden stillness of the attendants. Leto, it was observed, wore a black-edged tan cape over his stillsuit's grey slickness. His sister wore a green cape. The neck of each cape was held by a clasp in the form of an Atreides hawk -- gold with red jewels for eyes.
    Seeing this finery, Harah, who was one of Stilgar's wives, said: "I see you have dressed to honor your grandmother." Leto picked up his breakfast bowl before looking at Harah's dark and wind-creased face. He shook his head. Then: "How do you know it's not ourselves we honor?"
    Harah met his taunting stare without flinching, said: "My eyes are just as blue as yours!"
    Ghanima laughed aloud. Harah was always an adept at the Fremen challenge-game. In one sentence, she had said: "Don't taunt me, boy. You may be royalty, but we both bear the stigma of melange-addiction -- eyes without whites. What Fremen needs more finery or more honor than that?"
    Leto smiled, shook his head ruefully. "Harah, my love, if you were but younger and not already Stilgar's, I'd make you my own." 
    Harah accepted the small victory easily, signaling the other attendants to continue preparing the chambers for this day's important activities. "Eat your breakfasts," she said. "You'll need the energy today."
    "Then you agree that we're not too fine for our grandmother?" Ghanima asked, speaking around a mouthful of gruel.
    "Don't fear her, Ghani," Harah said.
    Leto gulped a mouthful of gruel, sent a probing stare at Harah. The woman was infernally folk-wise, seeing through the game of finery so quickly. "Will she believe we fear her?" Leto asked.
    "Like as not," Harah said. "She was our Reverend Mother, remember. I know her ways." 
    "How was Alia dressed?" Ghanima asked. 
    "I've not seen her." Harah spoke shortly, turning away.
    Leto and Ghanima exchanged a look, of shared secrets, bent quickly to their breakfast. Presently they went out into the great central passage.
    Ghanima spoke in one of the ancient languages they shared in genetic memory: "So today we have a grandmother." 
    "It bothers Alia greatly," Leto said.
    "Who likes to give up such authority?" Ghanima asked.
    Leto laughed softly, an oddly adult sound from flesh so young. "It's more than that." 
    "Will her mother's eyes observe what we have observed?" 
    "And why not?" Leto asked.
    "Yes . . . That could be what Alia fears."
    "Who knows Abomination better than Abomination?" Leto asked.
    "We could be wrong, you know," Ghanima said.
    "But we're not." And he quoted from the Bene Gesserit Azhar Book: "It is with reason and terrible experience that we call the pre-born Abomination. For who knows what lost and damned persona out of our evil past may take over the living flesh?" 
    "I know the history of it," Ghanima said. "But if that's true, why don't we suffer from this inner assault?" 
    "Perhaps our parents stand guard within us," Leto said. 
    "Then why not guardians for Alia as well?" 
    "I don't know. It could be because one of her parents remains among the living. It could be simply that we are still young and strong. Perhaps when we're older and more cynical . . ." 
    "We must take great care with this grandmother," Ghanima said.
    "And not discuss this Preacher who wanders our planet speaking heresy?" 
    "You don't really think he's our father!" 
    "I make no judgment on it, but Alia fears him." 
    Ghanima shook her head sharply. "I don't believe this Abomination nonsense!"
    "You've just as many memories as I have," Leto said. "You can believe what you want to believe."
    "You think it's because we haven't dared the spice trance and Alia has," Ghanima said.
    "That's exactly what I think."
    They fell silent, moving out into the flow of people in the central passage. It was cool in Sietch Tabr, but the stillsuits were warm and the twins kept their condenser hoods thrown back from their red hair. Their faces betrayed the stamp of shared genes: generous mouths, widely set eyes of spice addict blue-on-blue. 
    Leto was first to note the approach of their Aunt Alia.
    "Here she comes now," he said, shifting to Atreides battle language as a warning.
    Ghanima nodded to her aunt as Alia stopped in front of them, said: "A spoil of war greets her illustrious relative." Using the same Chakobsa language, Ghanima emphasized the meaning of her own name -- Spoil of War.
    "You see, Beloved Aunt," Leto said, "we prepare ourselves for today's encounter with your mother."
    Alia, the one person in the teeming royal household who harbored not the faintest surprise at adult behavior from these children, glared from one to the other. Then: "Hold your tongues, both of you!"
    Alia's bronze hair was pulled back into two golden water rings. Her oval face held a frown, the wide mouth with its downturned hint of self-indulgence was held in a tight line. Worry wrinkles fanned the corners of her blue-on-blue eyes.
    "I've warned both of you how to behave today," Alia said. "You know the reasons as well as I."
    "We know your reasons, but you may not know ours," Ghanima said.
    "Ghani!" Alia growled.
    Leto glared at his aunt, said: "Today of all days, we will not pretend to be simpering infants!"
    "No one wants you to simper," Alia said. "But we think it unwise for you to provoke dangerous thoughts in my mother. Irulan agrees with me. Who knows what role the Lady Jessica will choose? She is, after all, Bene Gesserit."
    Leto shook his head, wondering: Why does Alia not see what we suspect? Is she too far gone? And he made special note of the subtle gene-markers on Alia's face which betrayed the presence of her maternal grandfather. The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen had not been a pleasant person. At this observation, Leto felt the vague stirrings of his own disquiet, thinking: My own ancestor, too. 
    He said: "The Lady Jessica was trained to rule." 
    Ghanima nodded. "Why does she choose this time to come back?"
    Alia scowled. Then: "Is it possible she merely wants to see her grandchildren?"
    Ghanima thought: That's what you hope, my dear aunt. But it's damned well not likely.
    "She cannot rule here," Alia said. "She has Caladan. That should be enough."
    Ghanima spoke placatingly: "When our father went into the desert to die, he left you as Regent. He . . ." 
    "Have you any complaint?" Alia demanded.
    "It was a reasonable choice," Leto said, following his sister's lead. "You were the one person who knew what it was like to be born as we were born."
    "It's rumored that my mother has returned to the Sisterhood," Alia said, "and you both knew what the Bene Gesserit think about . . ." 
    "Abomination," Leto said. 
    "Yes!" Alia bit the word off.
    "Once a witch, always a witch -- so it's said," Ghanima said.
    Sister, you play a dangerous game, Leto thought, but he followed her lead, saying: "Our grandmother was a woman of greater simplicity than others of her kind. You share her memories, Alia; surely you must know what to expect."
    "Simplicity!" Alia said, shaking her head, looking around her at the thronged passage, then back to the twins. "If my mother were less complex, neither of you would be here -- nor I. I would have been her firstborn and none of this . . ." A shrug, half shudder, moved her shoulders. "I warn you two, be very careful what you do today." Alia looked up. "Here comes my guard." 
    "And you still don't think it safe for us to accompany you to the spaceport?" Leto asked.
    "Wait here," Alia said. "I'll bring her back." 
    Leto exchanged a look with his sister, said: "You've told us many times that the memories we hold from those who've passed before us lack a certain usefulness until we've experienced enough with our own flesh to make them reality. My sister and I believe this. We anticipate dangerous changes with the arrival of our grandmother."
    "Don't stop believing that," Alia said. She turned away to be enclosed by her guards and they moved swiftly down the passage toward the State Entrance where ornithopters awaited them. Ghanima wiped a tear from her right eye.
    "Water for the dead?" Leto whispered, taking his sister's arm.
    Ghanima drew in a deep, sighing breath, thinking of how she had observed her aunt, using the way she knew best from her own accumulation of ancestral experiences. "Spice trance did it?" she asked, knowing what Leto would say. 
    "Do you have a better suggestion?"
    "For the sake of argument, why didn't our father . . . or even our grandmother succumb?"
    He studied her a moment. Then: "You know the answer as well as I do. They had secure personalities by the time they came to Arrakis. The spice trance -- well . . ." He shrugged. "They weren't born into this world already possessed of their ancestors. Alia, though . . ."
    "Why didn't she believe the Bene Gesserit warnings?" Ghanima chewed her lower lip. "Alia had the same information to draw upon that we do."
    "They already were calling her Abomination," Leto said. "Don't you find it tempting to find out if you're stronger than all of those . . ."
    "No, I don't!" Ghanima looked away from her brother's probing stare, shuddered. She had only to consult her genetic memories and the Sisterhood's warnings took on vivid shape. The pre-born observably tended to become adults of nasty habits. And the likely cause . . . Again she shuddered.
    "Pity we don't have a few pre-born in our ancestry," Leto said.
    "Perhaps we do."
    "But we'd . . . Ahh, yes, the old unanswered question: Do we really have open access to every ancestor's total file of experiences?"
    From his own inner turmoil, Leto knew how this conversation must be disturbing his sister. They'd considered this question many times, always without conclusion. He said: "We must delay and delay and delay every time she urges the trance upon us. Extreme caution with a spice overdose; that's our best course." 
    "An overdose would have to be pretty large," Ghanima said.
    "Our tolerance is probably high," he agreed. "Look how much Alia requires."
    "I pity her," Ghanima said. "The lure of it must've been subtle and insidious, creeping up on her until . . ." 
    "She's a victim, yes," Leto said. "Abomination." 
    "We could be wrong." 
    "True."
    "I always wonder," Ghanima mused, "if the next ancestral memory I seek will be the one which . . ." 
    "The past is no farther away than your pillow," Leto said.
    "We must make the opportunity to discuss this with our grandmother." 
    "So her memory within me urges," Leto said.
    Ghanima met his gaze. Then: "Too much knowledge never makes for simple decisions."

= = = = = =

The sietch at the desert's rim 
Was Liet's, was Kynes's, 
Was Stilgar's, was Muad'Dib's 
And, once more, was Stilgar's. 
The Naibs one by one sleep in the sand, 
But the sietch endures.
-from a Fremen song

    Alia felt her heart pounding as she walked away from the twins. For a few pulsing seconds, she had felt herself near compulsion to stay with them and beg their help. What a foolish weakness! Memory of it sent a warning stillness through Alia. Would these twins dare practice prescience? The path which had engulfed their father must lure them -- spice trance with its visions of the future wavering like gauze blown on a fickle wind.
    Why cannot I see the future? Alia wondered. Much as I try, why does it elude me?
    The twins must be made to try, she told herself. They could be lured into it. They had the curiosity of children and it was linked to memories which traversed millennia. 
    Just as I have, Alia thought.
    Her guards opened the moisture seals at the State Entrance of the sietch, stood aside as she emerged onto the landing lip where the ornithopters waited. There was a wind from the desert blowing dust across the sky, but the day was bright. Emerging from the glowglobes of the sietch into the daylight sent her thoughts outward.
    Why was the Lady Jessica returning at this moment? Had stories been carried to Caladan, stories of how the Regency was . . . 
    "We must hurry, My Lady," one of her guards said, raising his voice above the wind sounds.
    Alia allowed herself to be helped into her ornithopter and secured the safety harness, but her thoughts went leaping ahead. 
    Why now?
    As the ornithopter's wings dipped and the craft went skidding into the air, she felt the pomp and power of her position as physical things -- but they were fragile, oh, how fragile!
    Why now, when her plans were not completed?
    The dust mists drifted, lifting, and she could see the bright sunlight upon the changing landscape of the planet: broad reaches of green vegetation where parched earth had once dominated.
    Without a vision of the future, I could fail. Oh, what magic I could perform if only I could see as Paul saw! Not for me the bitterness which prescient visions brought.
    A tormenting hunger shuddered through her and she wished she could put aside the power. Oh, to be as others were -- blind in that safest of all blindnesses, living only the hypnoidal half-life into which birth-shock precipitated most humans. But no! She had been born an Atreides, victim of that eons-deep awareness inflicted by her mother's spice addiction.
    Why does my mother return today?
    Gurney Halleck would be with her -- ever the devoted servant, the hired killer of ugly mien, loyal and straightforward, a musician who played murder with a sliptip, or entertained with equal ease upon his nine-string baliset. Some said he'd become her mother's lover. That would be a thing to ferret out; it might prove a most valuable leverage.
    The wish to be as others were left her. 
    Leto must be lured into the spice trance.
    She recalled asking the boy how he would deal with Gurney Halleck. And Leto, sensing undercurrents in her question, had said Halleck was loyal "to a fault," adding: "He adored . . . my father."
    She'd noted the small hesitation. Leto had almost said "me" instead of "my father." Yes, it was hard at times to separate the genetic memory from the chord of living flesh. Gurney Halleck would not make that separation easier for Leto. 
    A harsh smile touched Alia's lips.
    Gurney had chosen to return to Caladan with the Lady Jessica after Paul's death. His return would tangle many things. Coming back to Arrakis, he would add his own complexities to the existing lines. He had served Paul's father -- and thus the succession went: Leto I to Paul to Leto II. And out of the Bene Gesserit breeding program: Jessica to Alia to Ghanima -- a branching line. Gurney, adding to the confusion of identities, might prove valuable.
    What would he do if he discovered we carry the blood of Harkonnens, the Harkonnens he hates so bitterly?
    The smile on Alia's lips became introspective. The twins were, after all, children. They were like children with countless parents, whose memories belonged both to others and to self. They would stand at the lip of Sietch Tabr and watch the track of their grandmother's ship landing in the Arrakeen Basin. That burning mark of a ship's passage visible on the sky -- would it make Jessica's arrival more real for her grandchildren?
    My mother will ask me about their training, Alia thought. Do I mix prana bindu disciplines with a judicious hand? And I will tell her that they train themselves -- just as I did. I will quote her grandson to her: "Among the responsibilities of command is the necessity to punish . . . but only when the victim demands it."
    It came to Alia then that if she could only focus the Lady Jessica's attention sharply enough onto the twins, others might escape a closer inspection.
    Such a thing could be done. Leto was very much like Paul. And why not? He could be Paul whenever he chose. Even Ghanima possessed this shattering ability.
    Just as I can be my mother or any of the others who've shared their lives with us.
    She veered away from this thought, staring out at the passing landscape of the Shield Wall. Then: How was it to leave the warm safety of water-rich Caladan and return to Arrakis, to this desert planet where her Duke was murdered and her son died a martyr? 
    Why did the Lady Jessica come back at this time?
    Alia found no answer -- nothing certain. She could share another's ego-awareness, but when experiences went their separate ways, then motives diverged as well. The stuff of decisions lay in the private actions taken by individuals. For the pre-born, the many-born Atreides, this remained the paramount reality, in itself another kind of birth: it was the absolute separation of living, breathing flesh when that flesh left the womb which had afflicted it with multiple awareness.
    Alia saw nothing strange in loving and hating her mother simultaneously. It was a necessity, a required balance without room for guilt or blame. Where could loving or hating stop? Was one to blame the Bene Gesserit because they set the Lady Jessica upon a certain course? Guilt and blame grew diffuse when memory covered millennia. The Sisterhood had only been seeking to breed a Kwisatz Haderach: the male counterpart of a fully developed Reverend Mother . . . and more -- a human of superior sensitivity and awareness, the Kwisatz Haderach who could be many places simultaneously. And the Lady Jessica, merely a pawn in that breeding program, had the bad taste to fall in love with the breeding partner to whom she had been assigned. Responsive to her beloved Duke's wishes, she produced a son instead of the daughter which the Sisterhood had commanded as the firstborn.
    Leaving me to be born after she became addicted to the spice! And now they don't want me. Now they fear me! With good reason . . . 
    They'd achieved Paul, their Kwisatz Haderach, one lifetime too early -- a minor miscalculation in a plan that extended. And now they had another problem: the Abomination, who carried the precious genes they'd sought for so many generations.
    Alia felt a shadow pass across her, glanced upward. Her escort was assuming the high guard position preparatory to landing. She shook her head in wonderment at her wandering thoughts. What good was served by calling up old lifetimes and rubbing their mistakes together? This was a new lifetime.
    Duncan Idaho had put his mentat awareness to the question of why Jessica returned at this time, evaluating the problem in the human-computer fashion which was his gift. He said she returned to take over the twins for the Sisterhood. The twins, too, carried those precious genes. Duncan could well be right. That might be enough to take the Lady Jessica out of her self-imposed seclusion on Caladan. If the Sisterhood commanded . . . Well, why else would she come back to the scenes of so much that must be shatteringly painful to her?
    "We shall see," Alia muttered.
    She felt the ornithopter touch down on the roof of her Keep, a positive and jarring punctuation which filled her with grim anticipation.

= = = = = =

melange (me'-lange also ma,lanj) n-s, origin uncertain (thought to derive from ancient Terran Franzh): a. mixture of spices; b. spice of Arrakis (Dune) with geriatric properties first noted by Yanshuph Ashkoko, royal chemist in reign of Shakkad the Wise; Arrakeen melange, found only in deepest desert sands of Arrakis, linked to prophetic visions of Paul Muad'Dib (Atreides), first Fremen Mahdi; also employed by Spacing Guild Navigators and the Bene Gesserit.
-Dictionary Royal fifth edition

    The two big cats came over the rocky ridge in the dawn light, loping easily. They were not really into the passionate hunt as yet, merely looking over their territory. They were called Laza tigers, a special breed brought here to the planet Salusa Secundus almost eight thousand years past. Genetic manipulation of the ancient Terran stock had erased some of the original tiger features and refined other elements. The fangs remained long. Their faces were wide, eyes alert and intelligent. The paws were enlarged to give them support on uneven terrain and their sheathed claws could extend some ten centimeters, sharpened at the ends into razor tips by abrasive compression of the sheath. Their coats were a flat and even tan which made them almost invisible against sand.
    They differed in another way from their ancestors: servo-stimulators had been implanted in their brains while they were cubs. The stimulators made them pawns of whoever possessed the transmitter.
    It was cold and as the cats paused to scan the terrain, their breath made fog on the air. Around them lay a region of Salusa Secundus left sere and barren, a place which harbored a scant few sandtrout smuggled from Arrakis and kept precariously alive in the dream that the melange monopoly might be broken. Where the cats stood, the landscape was marked by tan rocks and a scattering of sparse bushes, silvery green in the long shadows of the morning sun.
    Without the slightest movement the cats grew suddenly alert. Their eyes turned slowly left, then their heads turned. Far down in the scarred land two children struggled up a dry wash, hand in hand. The children appeared to be of an age, perhaps nine or ten standard years. They were red-haired and wore stillsuits partly covered by rich white bourkas which bore all around the hem and at the forehead the hawk crest of the House Atreides worked in flame-jewel threads. As they walked, the children chattered happily and their voices carried clearly to the hunting cats. The Laza tigers knew this game; they had played it before, but they remained quiescent, awaiting the triggering of the chase signal in their servo-stimulators.
    Now a man appeared on the ridgetop behind the cats. He stopped and surveyed the scene: cats, children. The man wore a Sardaukar working uniform in grey and black with insignia of a Levenbrech, aide to a Bashar. A harness passed behind his neck and under his arms to carry the servo-transmitter in a thin package against his chest where the keys could be reached easily by either hand.
    The cats did not turn at his approach. They knew this man by sound and smell. He scrambled down to stop two paces from the cats, mopped his forehead. The air was cold, but this was hot work. Again his pale eyes surveyed the scene: cats, children. He pushed a damp strand of blond hair back under his black working helmet, touched the implanted microphone in his throat. 
    "The cats have them in sight."
    The answering voice came to him through receivers implanted behind each ear. "We see them." 
    "This time?" the Levenbrech asked.
    "Will they do it without a chase command?" the voice countered.
    "They're ready," the Levenbrech said.
    "Very well. Let us see if four conditioning sessions will be enough." 
    "Tell me when you're ready." 
    "Any time." 
    "Now, then," the Levenbrech said.
    He touched a red key on the right hand side of his servo-transmitter, first releasing a bar which shielded the key. Now the cats stood without any transmitted restraints. He held his hand over a black key below the red one, ready to stop the animals should they turn on him. But they took no notice of him, crouched, and began working their way down the ridge toward the children. Their great paws slid out in smooth gliding motions.
    The Levenbrech squatted to observe, knowing that somewhere around him a hidden transeye carried this entire scene to a secret monitor within the Keep where his Prince lived. 
    Presently the cats began to lope, then to run.
    The children, intent on climbing through the rocky terrain, still had not seen their peril. One of them laughed, a high and piping sound in the clear air. The other child stumbled and, recovering balance, turned and saw the cats. The child pointed. "Look!" 
    Both children stopped and stared at the interesting intrusion into their lives. They were still standing when the Laza tigers hit them, one cat to each child. The children died with a casual abruptness, necks broken swiftly. The cats began to feed. 
    "Shall I recall them?" the Levenbrech asked.
    "Let them finish. They did well. I knew they would; this pair is superb." 
    "Best I've ever seen," the Levenbrech agreed.
    "Very good, then. Transport is being sent for you. We will sign off now."
    The Levenbrech stood and stretched. He refrained from looking directly off to the high ground on his left where a telltale glitter had revealed the location of the transeye, which had relayed his fine performance to his Bashar far away in the green lands of the Capitol. The Levenbrech smiled. There would be a promotion for this day's work. Already he could feel a Bator's insignia at his neck -- and someday, Burseg . . . Even, one day, Bashar. People who served well in the corps of Farad'n, grandson of the late Shaddam IV, earned rich promotions. One day, when the Prince was seated on his rightful throne, there would be even greater promotions. A Bashar's rank might not be the end of it. There were Baronies and Earldoms to be had on the many worlds of this realm . . . once the twin Atreides were removed.

= = = = = =

The Fremen must return to his original faith, to his genius in forming human communities; he must return to the past, where that lesson of survival was learned in the struggle with Arrakis. The only business of the Fremen should be that of opening his soul to the inner teachings. The worlds of the Imperium, the Landsraad and the CHOAM Confederacy have no message to give him. They will only rob him of his soul.
-The Preacher at Arrakeen

    All around the Lady Jessica, reaching far out into the dun flatness of the landing plain upon which her transport rested, crackling and sighing after its dive from space, stood an ocean of humanity. She estimated half a million people were there and perhaps only a third of them pilgrims. They stood in awesome silence, attention fixed on the transport's exit platform, whose shadowy hatchway concealed her and her party.
    It lacked two hours until noon, but already the air above that throng reflected a dusty shimmering in promise of the day's heat.
    Jessica touched her silver-flecked copper hair where it framed her oval face beneath the aba hood of a Reverend Mother. She knew she did not look her best after the long trip, and the black of the aba was not her best color. But she had worn this garment here before. The significance of the aba robe would not be lost upon the Fremen. She sighed. Space travel did not agree with her, and there'd been that added burden of memories -- the other trip from Caladan to Arrakis when her Duke had been forced into this fief against his better judgment.
    Slowly, probing with her Bene Gesserit-trained ability to detect significant minutiae, she scanned the sea of people. There were stillsuit hoods of dull grey, garments of Fremen from the deep desert; there were white-robed pilgrims with penitence marks on their shoulders; there were scattered pockets of rich merchants, hoodless in light clothing to flaunt their disdain for water loss in Arrakeen's parching air . . . and there was the delegation from the Society of the Faithful, green robed and heavily hooded, standing aloof within the sanctity of their own group.
    Only when she lifted her gaze from the crowd did the scene take on any similarity to that which had greeted her upon her arrival with her beloved Duke. How long ago had that been? More than twenty years. She did not like to think of those intervening heartbeats. Time lay within her like a dead weight, and it was as though her years away from this planet had never been. 
    Once more into the dragon's mouth, she thought.
    Here, upon this plain, her son had wrested the Imperium from the late Shaddam IV. A convulsion of history had imprinted this place into men's minds and beliefs.
    She heard the restless stirring of the entourage behind her and again she sighed. They must wait for Alia, who had been delayed. Alia's party could be seen now approaching from the far edge of the throng, creating a human wave as a wedge of Royal Guards opened a passage.
    Jessica scanned the landscape once more. Many differences submitted to her searching stare. A prayer balcony had been added to the landing field's control tower. And visible far off to the left across the plain stood the awesome pile of plasteel which Paul had built as his fortress -- his "sietch above the sand." It was the largest integrated single construction ever to rise from the hand of man. Entire cities could have been housed within its walls and room to spare. Now it housed the most powerful governing force in the Imperium, Alia's "Society of the Faithful," which she had built upon her brother's body.
    That place must go, Jessica thought.
    Alia's delegation had reached the foot of the exit ramp and stood there expectantly. Jessica recognized Stilgar's craggy features. And God forfend! There stood the Princess Irulan hiding her savagery in that seductive body with its cap of golden hair exposed by a vagrant breeze. Irulan seemed not to have aged a day; it was an affront. And there, at the point of the wedge, was Alia, her features impudently youthful, her eyes staring upward into the hatchway's shadows. Jessica's mouth drew into a straight line and she scanned her daughter's face. A leaden sensation pulsed through Jessica's body and she heard the surf of her own life within her ears. The rumors were true! Horrible! Horrible! Alia had fallen into the forbidden way. The evidence was there for the initiate to read. Abomination!
    In the few moments it took her to recover, Jessica realized how much she had hoped to find the rumors false.
    What of the twins? she asked herself. Are they lost, too?
    Slowly, as befitted the mother of a god, Jessica moved out of the shadows and onto the lip of the ramp. Her entourage remained behind as instructed. These next few moments were the crucial ones. Jessica stood alone in full view of the throng. She heard Gurney Halleck cough nervously behind her. Gurney had objected: "Not even a shield on you? Gods below, woman! You're insane!"
    But among Gurney's most valuable features was a core of obedience. He would say his piece and then he would obey. Now he obeyed.
    The human sea emitted a sound like the hiss of a giant sandworm as Jessica emerged. She raised her arms in the benedictory to which the priesthood had conditioned the Imperium. With significant pockets of tardiness, but still like one giant organism, the people sank to their knees. Even the official party complied.
    Jessica had marked out the places of delay, and she knew that other eyes behind her and among her agents in the throng had memorized a temporary map with which to seek out the tardy.
    As Jessica remained with her arms upraised, Gurney and his men emerged. They moved swiftly past her down the ramp, ignoring the official party's startled looks, joining the agents who identified themselves by handsign. Quickly they fanned out through the human sea, leaping knots of kneeling figures, dashing through narrow lanes. A few of their targets saw the danger and tried to flee. They were the easiest: a thrown knife, a garrote loop and the runners went down. Others were herded out of the press, hands bound, feet hobbled.
    Through it all, Jessica stood with arms outstretched, blessing by her presence, keeping the throng subservient. She read the signs of spreading rumors though, and knew the dominant one because it had been planted: "The Reverend Mother returns to weed out the slackers. Bless the mother of our Lord!"
    When it was over -- a few dead bodies sprawled on the sand, captives removed to holding pens beneath the landing tower -- Jessica lowered her arms. Perhaps three minutes had elapsed. She knew there was little likelihood Gurney and his men had taken any of the ringleaders, the ones who posed the most potent threat. They would be the alert and sensitive ones. But the captives would contain some interesting fish as well as the usual culls and dullards.
    Jessica lowered her arms and, cheering, the people surged to their feet.
    As though nothing untoward had happened, Jessica walked alone down the ramp, avoiding her daughter, singling out Stilgar for concentrated attention. The black beard which fanned out across the neck of his stillsuit hood like a wild delta contained flecks of grey, but his eyes carried that same whiteless intensity they'd presented to her on their first encounter in the desert. Stilgar knew what had just occurred, and approved. Here stood a true Fremen Naib, a leader of men and capable of bloody decisions. His first words were completely in character.
    "Welcome home, My Lady. It's always a pleasure to see direct and effective action."
    Jessica allowed herself a tiny smile. "Close the port, Stil. No one leaves until we've questioned those we took." 
    "It's already done, My Lady," Stilgar said. "Gurney's man and I planned this together." 
    "Those were your men, then, the ones who helped." 
    "Some of them, My Lady."
    She read the hidden reservations, nodded. "You studied me pretty well in those old days, Stil."
    "As you once were at pains to tell me, My Lady, one observes the survivors and learns from them."
    Alia stepped forward then and Stilgar stood aside while Jessica confronted her daughter.
    Knowing there was no way to hide what she had learned, Jessica did not even try concealment. Alia could read the minutiae when she needed, could read as well as any adept of the Sisterhood. She would already know by Jessica's behavior what had been seen and interpreted. They were enemies for whom the word mortal touched only the surface.
    Alia chose anger as the easiest and most proper reaction.
    "How dare you plan an action such as this without consulting me?" she demanded, pushing her face close to Jessica's.
    Jessica spoke mildly: "As you've just heard, Gurney didn't even let me in on the whole plan. It was thought . . ." 
    "And you, Stilgar!" Alia said, rounding on him. "To whom are you loyal?"
    "My oath is to Muad'Dib's children," Stilgar said, speaking stiffly. "We have removed a threat to them."
    "And why doesn't that fill you with joy . . . daughter?" Jessica asked.
    Alia blinked, glanced once at her mother, suppressed the inner tempest, and even managed a straight-toothed smile. "I am filled with joy . . . mother," she said. And to her own surprise, Alia found that she was happy, experiencing a terrible delight that it was all out in the open at last between herself and her mother. The moment she had dreaded was past and the power balance had not really been changed. "We will discuss this in more detail at a more convenient time," Alia said, speaking both to her mother and Stilgar.
    "But of course," Jessica said, turning with a movement of dismissal to face the Princess Irulan.
    For a few brief heartbeats, Jessica and the Princess stood silently studying each other -- two Bene Gesserits who had broken with the Sisterhood for the same reason: love . . . both of them for love of men who now were dead. This Princess had loved Paul in vain, becoming his wife but not his mate. And now she lived only for the children given to Paul by his Fremen concubine, Chani. 
    Jessica spoke first: "Where are my grandchildren?" 
    "At Sietch Tabr." 
    "Too dangerous for them here; I understand." 
    Irulan permitted herself a faint nod. She had observed the interchange between Jessica and Alia, but put upon it an interpretation for which Alia had prepared her. "Jessica has returned to the Sisterhood and we both know they have plans for Paul's children." Irulan had never been the most accomplished adept in the Bene Gesserit -- valuable more for the fact that she was a daughter of Shaddam IV than for any other reason; often too proud to exert herself in extending her capabilities. Now she chose sides with an abruptness which did no credit to her training.
    "Really, Jessica," Irulan said, "the Royal Council should have been consulted. It was wrong of you to work only through --"
    "Am I to believe none of you trust Stilgar?" Jessica asked.
    Irulan possessed the wit to realize there could be no answer to such a question. She was glad that the priestly delegates, unable to contain their impatience any longer, pressed forward. She exchanged a glance with Alia, thinking: Jessica's as haughty and certain of herself as ever! A Bene Gesserit axiom arose unbidden in her mind, though: "The haughty do but build castle walls behind which they try to hide their doubts and fears." Could that be true of Jessica? Surely not. Then it must be a pose. But for what purpose? The question disturbed Irulan.
    The priests were noisy in their possession of Muad'Dib's mother. Some only touched her arms, but most bowed low and spoke greetings. At last the leaders of the delegation took their turn with the Most Holy Reverend Mother, accepting the ordained role -- "The first shall be last" -- with practiced smiles, telling her that the official Lustration ceremony awaited her at the Keep, Paul's old fortress-stronghold.
    Jessica studied the pair, finding them repellent. One was called Javid, a young man of surly features and round cheeks, shadowed eyes which could not hide the suspicions lurking in their depths. The other was Zebataleph, second son of a Naib she'd known in her Fremen days, as he was quick to remind her. He was easily classified: jollity linked with ruthlessness, a thin face with blond beard, an air about him of secret excitements and powerful knowledge. Javid she judged far more dangerous of the two, a man of private counsel, simultaneously magnetic and -- she could find no other word -- repellent. She found his accents strange, full of old Fremen pronunciations, as though he'd come from some isolated pocket of his people.
    "Tell me, Javid," she said, "whence come you?" 
    "I am but a simple Fremen of the desert," he said, every syllable giving the lie to the statement.
    Zebataleph intruded with an offensive deference, almost mocking: "We have much to discuss of the old days, My Lady. I was one of the first, you know, to recognize the holy nature of your son's mission." 
    "But you weren't one of his Fedaykin," she said.
    "No, My Lady. I possessed a more philosophic bent; I studied for the priesthood." 
    And insured the preservation of your skin, she thought. 
    Javid said: "They await us at the Keep, My Lady." 
    Again she found the strangeness of his accent an open question demanding an answer. "Who awaits us?" she asked.
    "The Convocation of the Faith, all those who keep bright the name and the deeds of your holy son," Javid said.
    Jessica glanced around her, saw Alia smiling at Javid, asked: "Is this man one of your appointees, daughter?" 
    Alia nodded. "A man destined for great deeds." 
    But Jessica saw that Javid had no pleasure in this attention, marked him for Gurney's special study. And there came Gurney with five trusted men, signaling that they had the suspicious laggards under interrogation. He walked with the rolling stride of a powerful man, glance flicking left, right, all around, every muscle flowing through the relaxed alertness she had taught him out of the Bene Gesserit prana-bindu manual. He was an ugly lump of trained reflexes, a killer, and altogether terrifying to some, but Jessica loved him and prized him above all other living men. The scar of an inkvine whip rippled along his jaw, giving him a sinister appearance, but a smile softened his face as he saw Stilgar.
    "Well done, Stil," he said. And they gripped arms in the Fremen fashion.
    "The Lustration," Javid said, touching Jessica's arm.
    Jessica drew back, chose her words carefully in the controlled power of Voice, her tone and delivery calculated for a precise emotional effect upon Javid and Zebataleph: "I returned to Dune to see my grandchildren. Must we take time for this priestly nonsense?"
    Zebataleph reacted with shock, his mouth dropping open, eyes alarmed, glancing about at those who had heard. The eyes marked each listener. Priestly nonsense! What effect would such words have, coming from the mother of their messiah?
    Javid, however, confirmed Jessica's assessment. His mouth hardened, then smiled. The eyes did not smile, nor did they waver to mark the listeners. Javid already knew each member of this party. He had an earshot map of those who would be watched with special care from this point onward. Only seconds later, Javid stopped smiling with an abruptness which said he knew how he had betrayed himself. Javid had not failed to do his homework: he knew the observational powers possessed by the Lady Jessica. A short, jerking nod of his head acknowledged those powers.
    In a lightning flash of mentation, Jessica weighed the necessities. A subtle hand signal to Gurney would bring Javid's death. It could be done here for effect, or in quiet later, and be made to appear an accident.
    She thought: When we try to conceal our innermost drives, the entire being screams betrayal. Bene Gesserit training turned upon this revelation -- raising the adepts above it and teaching them to read the open flesh of others. She saw Javid's intelligence as valuable, a temporary weight in the balance. If he could be won over, he could be the link she needed, the line into the Arrakeen priesthood. And he was Alia's man.
    Jessica said: "My official party must remain small. We have room for one addition, however. Javid, you will join us. Zebataleph, I am sorry. And, Javid . . . I will attend this -- this ceremony -- if you insist."
    Javid allowed himself a deep breath and a low-voiced "As Muad'Dib's mother commands." He glanced to Alia, to Zebataleph, back to Jessica. "It pains me to delay the reunion with your grandchildren, but there are, ahhh, reasons of state . . ."
    Jessica thought: Good. He's a businessman above all else. Once we've determined the proper coinage, we'll buy him. And she found herself enjoying the fact that he insisted on his precious ceremony. This little victory would give him power with his fellows, and they both knew it. Accepting his Lustration could be a down payment on later services.
    "I presume you've arranged transportation," she said.

= = = = = =

I give you the desert chameleon, whose ability to blend itself into the background tells you all you need to know about the roots of ecology and the foundations of a personal identity.
-Book of Diatribes from the Hayt Chronicle

    Leto sat playing a small baliset which had been sent to him on his fifth birthday by that consummate artist of the instrument, Gurney Halleck. In four years of practice, Leto had achieved a certain fluency, although the two bass side strings still gave him trouble. He had found the baliset soothing, however, for particular feelings of upset -- a fact which had not escaped Ghanima. He sat now in twilight on a rock shelf at the southernmost extremity of the craggy outcropping which sheltered Sietch Tabr. Softly he strummed the baliset.
    Ghanima stood behind him, her small figure radiating protest. She had not wanted to come here into the open after learning from Stilgar that their grandmother was delayed in Arrakeen. She particularly objected to coming here with nightfall near. Attempting to hurry her brother, she asked: "Well, what is it?" 
    For an answer, he began another tune.
    For the first time since accepting the gift, Leto felt intensely aware that this baliset had originated with a master craftsman on Caladan. He possessed inherited memories which could inflict him with profound nostalgia for that beautiful planet where House Atreides had ruled. Leto had but to relax his inner barriers in the presence of this music and he would hear memories from those times when Gurney had employed the baliset to beguile his friend and charge, Paul Atreides. With the baliset sounding in his own hands, Leto felt himself more and more dominated by his father's psychical presence. Still he played, relating more strongly to the instrument with every second that passed. He sensed the absolute idealized summation within himself which knew how to play this baliset, though nine-year-old muscles had not yet been conditioned to that inner awareness.
    Ghanima tapped her foot impatiently, unaware that she matched the rhythm of her brother's playing.
    Setting his mouth in a grimace of concentration, Leto broke from the familiar music and tried a song more ancient than any even Gurney had played. It had been old when Fremen migrated to their fifth planet. The words echoed a Zensunni theme, and he heard them in his memory while his fingers elicited a faltering version of the tune.

"Nature's beauteous form 
Contains a lovely essence 
Called by some -- decay. 
By this lovely presence 
New life finds its way. 
Tears shed silently 
Are but water of the soul: 
They bring new life 
To the pain of being --
A separation from that seeing 
Which death makes whole."

    Ghanima spoke behind him as he strummed the final note. "There's a mucky old song. Why that one?" 
    "Because it fits." 
    "Will you play it for Gurney?" 
    "Perhaps." 
    "He'll call it moody nonsense." 
    "I know."
    Leto peered back over his shoulder at Ghanima. There was no surprise in him that she knew the song and its lyrics, but he felt a sudden onset of awe at the singleness of their twinned lives. One of them could die and yet remain alive in the other's consciousness, every shared memory intact; they were that close. He found himself frightened by the timeless web of that closeness, broke his gaze away from her. The web contained gaps, he knew. His fear arose from the newest of those gaps. He felt their lives beginning to separate and wondered: How can I tell her of this thing which has happened only to me?
    He peered out over the desert, seeing the deep shadows behind the barachans -- those high, crescent-shaped migratory dunes which moved like waves around Arrakis. This was Kedem, the inner desert, and its dunes were rarely marked these days by the irregularities of a giant worm's progress. Sunset drew bloody streaks over the dunes, imparting a fiery light to the shadow edges. A hawk falling from the crimson sky captured his awareness as it captured a rock partridge in flight.
    Directly beneath him on the desert floor plants grew in a profusion of greens, watered by a qanat which flowed partly in the open, partly in covered tunnels. The water came from giant windtrap collectors behind him on the highest point of rock. The green flag of the Atreides flew openly there. 
    Water and green.
    The new symbols of Arrakis: water and green.
    A diamond-shaped oasis of planted dunes spread beneath his high perch, focusing his attention into sharp Fremen awareness. The bell call of a nightbird came from the cliff below him, and it amplified the sensation that he lived this moment out of a wild past.
    Nous avons change tout cela, he thought, falling easily into one of the ancient tongues which he and Ghanima employed in private. "We have altered all of that." He sighed. Oublier je ne puis. "I cannot forget."
    Beyond the oasis, he could see in this failing light the land Fremen called "The Emptiness" -- the land where nothing grows, the land never fertile. Water and the great ecological plan were changing that. There were places now on Arrakis where one could see the plush green velvet of forested hills. Forests on Arrakis! Some in the new generation found it difficult to imagine dunes beneath those undulant green hills. To such young eyes there was no shock value in seeing the flat foliage of rain trees. But Leto found himself thinking now in the Old Fremen manner, wary of change, fearful in the presence of the new.
    He said: "The children tell me they seldom find sandtrout here near the surface anymore."
    "What's that supposed to indicate?" Ghanima asked. There was petulance in her tone.
    "Things are beginning to change very swiftly," he said.
    Again the bird chimed in the cliff, and night fell upon the desert as the hawk had fallen upon the partridge. Night often subjected him to an assault of memories -- all of those inner lives clamoring for their moment. Ghanima didn't object to this phenomenon in quite the way he did. She knew his disquiet, though, and he felt her hand touch his shoulder in sympathy.
    He struck an angry chord from the baliset. 
    How could he tell her what was happening to him?
    Within his head were wars, uncounted lives parceling out their ancient memories: violent accidents, love's languor, the colors of many places and many faces . . . the buried sorrows and leaping joys of multitudes. He heard elegies to springs on planets which no longer existed, green dances and firelight, wails and halloos, a harvest of conversations without number.
    Their assault was hardest to bear at nightfall in the open. 
    "Shouldn't we be going in?" she asked.
    He shook his head, and she felt the movement, realizing at last that his troubles went deeper than she had suspected.
    Why do I so often greet the night out here? he asked himself. He did not feel Ghanima withdraw her hand.
    "You know why you torment yourself this way," she said.
    He heard the gentle chiding in her voice. Yes, he knew. The answer lay there in his awareness, obvious: Because that great known-unknown within moves me like a wave. He felt the cresting of his past as though he rode a surfboard. He had his father's time-spread memories of prescience superimposed upon everything else, yet he wanted all of those pasts. He wanted them. And they were so very dangerous. He knew that completely now with this new thing which he would have to tell Ghanima.
    The desert was beginning to glow under the rising light of First Moon. He stared out at the false immobility of sand furls reaching into infinity. To his left, in the near distance, lay The Attendant, a rock outcropping which sandblast winds had reduced to a low, sinuous shape like a dark worm striking through the dunes. Someday the rock beneath him would be cut down to such a shape and Sietch Tabr would be no more, except in the memories of someone like himself. He did not doubt that there would be someone like himself.
    "Why're you staring at The Attendant?" Ghanima asked.
    He shrugged. In defiance of their guardians' orders, he and Ghanima often went to The Attendant. They had discovered a secret hiding place there, and Leto knew now why that place lured them.
    Beneath him, its distance foreshortened by darkness, an open stretch of qanat gleamed in moonlight; its surface rippled with movements of predator fish which Fremen always planted in their stored water to keep out the sandtrout.
    "I stand between fish and worm," he murmured. 
    "What?" 
    He repeated it louder.
    She put a hand to her mouth, beginning to suspect the thing which moved him. Her father had acted thus; she had but to peer inward and compare.
    Leto shuddered. Memories which fastened him to places his flesh had never known presented him with answers to questions he had not asked. He saw relationships and unfolding events against a gigantic inner screen. The sandworm of Dune would not cross water; water poisoned it. Yet water had been known here in prehistoric times. White gypsum pans attested to bygone lakes and seas. Wells, deep-drilled, found water which sandtrout sealed off. As clearly as if he'd witnessed the events, he saw what had happened on this planet and it filled him with foreboding for the cataclysmic changes which human intervention was bringing.
    His voice barely above a whisper, he said: "I know what happened, Ghanima." 
    She bent close to him. "Yes?" 
    "The sandtrout . . ."
    He fell silent and she wondered why he kept referring to the haploid phase of the planet's giant sandworm, but she dared not prod him.
    "The sandtrout," he repeated, "was introduced here from some other place. This was a wet planet then. They proliferated beyond the capability of existing ecosystems to deal with them. Sandtrout encysted the available free water, made this a desert planet . . . and they did it to survive. In a planet sufficiently dry, they could move to their sandworm phase."
    "The sandtrout?" She shook her head, not doubting him, but unwilling to search those depths where he gathered such information. And she thought: Sandtrout? Many times in this flesh and other had she played the childhood game, poling for sandtrout, teasing them into a thin glove membrane before taking them to the deathstill for their water. It was difficult to think of this mindless little creature as a shaper of enormous events.
    Leto nodded to himself. Fremen had always known to plant predator fish in their water cisterns. The haploid sandtrout actively resisted great accumulations of water near the planet's surface; predators swam in that qanat below him. Their sandworm vector could handle small amounts of water -- the amounts held in cellular bondage by human flesh, for example. But confronted by large bodies of water, their chemical factories went wild, exploded in the death-transformation which produced the dangerous melange concentrate, the ultimate awareness drug employed in a diluted fraction for the sietch orgy. That pure concentrate had taken Paul Muad'Dib through the walls of Time, deep into the well of dissolution which no other male had ever dared.
    Ghanima sensed her brother trembling where he sat in front of her. "What have you done?" she demanded.
    But he would not leave his own train of revelation. "Fewer sandtrout -- the ecological transformation of the planet . . ." 
    "They resist it, of course," she said, and now she began to understand the fear in his voice, drawn into this thing against her will.
    "When the sandtrout go, so do all the worms," he said. "The tribes must be warned." 
    "No more spice," she said.
    Words merely touched high points of the system danger which they both saw hanging over human intrusion into Dune's ancient relationships.
    "It's the thing Alia knows," he said. "It's why she gloats." 
    "How can you be sure of that?" 
    "I'm sure."
    Now she knew for certain what disturbed him, and she felt the knowledge chill her.
    "The tribes won't believe us if she denies it," he said.
    His statement went to the primary problem of their existence: What Fremen expected wisdom from a nine-year-old? Alia, growing farther and farther from her own inner sharing each day, played upon this.
    "We must convince Stilgar," Ghanima said.
    As one, their heads turned and they stared out over the moonlit desert. It was a different place now, changed by just a few moments of awareness. Human interplay with that environment had never been more apparent to them. They felt themselves as integral parts of a dynamic system held in delicately balanced order. The new outlook involved a real change of consciousness which flooded them with observations. As Liet-Kynes had said, the universe was a place of constant conversation between animal populations. The haploid sandtrout had spoken to them as human animals. 
    "The tribes would understand a threat to water," Leto said.
    "But it's a threat to more than water. It's a --" She fell silent, understanding the deeper meaning of his words. Water was the ultimate power symbol on Arrakis. At their roots Fremen remained special-application animals, desert survivors, governance experts under conditions of stress. And as water became plentiful, a strange symbol transfer came over them even while they understood the old necessities.
    "You mean a threat to power," she corrected him. 
    "Of course." 
    "But will they believe us?" 
    "If they see it happening, if they see the imbalance." 
    "Balance," she said, and repeated her father's words from long ago: "It's what distinguishes a people from a mob." 
    Her words called up their father in him and he said: "Economics versus beauty -- a story older than Sheba." He sighed, looked over his shoulder at her. "I'm beginning to have prescient dreams, Ghani." 
    A sharp gasp escaped her.
    He said: "When Stilgar told us our grandmother was delayed -- I already knew that moment. Now my other dreams are suspect."
    "Leto . . ." She shook her head, eyes damp. "It came later for our father. Don't you think it might be --"
    "I've dreamed myself enclosed in armor and racing across the dunes," he said. "And I've been to Jacurutu." 
    "Jacu . . ." She cleared her throat. "That old myth!" 
    "A real place. Ghani! I must find this man they call The Preacher. I must find him and question him." 
    "You think he's . . . our father?" 
    "Ask yourself that question." 
    "It'd be just like him," she agreed, "but . . ." 
    "I don't like the things I know I'll do," he said. "For the first time in my life I understand my father."
    She felt excluded from his thoughts, said: "The Preacher's probably just an old mystic."
    "I pray for that," he whispered. "Oh, how I pray for that!" He rocked forward, got to his feet. The baliset hummed in his hand as he moved. "Would that he were only Gabriel without a horn." He stared silently at the moonlit desert.
    She turned to look where he looked, saw the foxfire glow of rotting vegetation at the edge of the sietch plantings, then the clean blending into lines of dunes. That was a living place out there. Even when the desert slept, something remained awake in it. She sensed that wakefulness, hearing animals below her drinking at the qanat. Leto's revelation had transformed the night: this was a living moment, a time to discover regularities within perpetual change, an instant in which to feel that long movement from their Terranic past, all of it encapsulated in her memories.
    "Why Jacurutu?" she asked, and the flatness of her tone shattered the mood.
    "Why . . . I don't know. When Stilgar first told us how they killed the people there and made the place tabu, I thought . . . what you thought. But danger comes from there now . . . and The Preacher."
    She didn't respond, didn't demand that he share more of his prescient dreams with her, and she knew how much this told him of her terror. That way led to Abomination and they both knew it. The word hung unspoken between them as he turned and led the way back over the rocks to the sietch entrance. Abomination.

= = = = = =

The Universe is God's. It is one thing, a wholeness against which all separations may be identified. Transient life, even that self-aware and reasoning life which we call sentient, holds only fragile trusteeship on any portion of the wholeness.
-Commentaries from the C.E.T. (Commission of Ecumenical Translators)

    Halleck used hand signals to convey the actual message while speaking aloud of other matters. He didn't like the small anteroom the priests had assigned for this report, knowing it would be crawling with spy devices. Let them try to break the tiny hand signals, though. The Atreides had used this means of communication for centuries without anyone the wiser.
    Night had fallen outside, but the room had no windows, depending upon glowglobes at the upper corners.
    "Many of those we took were Alia's people," Halleck signaled, watching Jessica's face as he spoke aloud, telling her the interrogation still continued.
    "It was as you anticipated then," Jessica replied, her fingers winking. She nodded and spoke an open reply: "I'll expect a full report when you're satisfied, Gurney."
    "Of course, My Lady," he said, and his fingers continued: "There is another thing, quite disturbing. Under the deep drugs, some of our captives talked of Jacurutu and, as they spoke the name, they died."
    "A conditioned heart-stopper?" Jessica's fingers asked. And she said: "Have you released any of the captives?" 
    "A few, My Lady -- the more obvious culls." And his fingers darted: "We suspect a heart-compulsion but are not yet certain. The autopsies aren't completed. I thought you should know about this thing of Jacurutu, however, and came immediately."
    "My Duke and I always thought Jacurutu an interesting legend probably based on fact," Jessica's fingers said, and she ignored the usual tug of sorrow as she spoke of her long-dead love. 
    "Do you have orders?" Halleck asked, speaking aloud. 
    Jessica answered in kind, telling him to return to the landing field and report when he had positive information, but her fingers conveyed another message: "Resume contact with your friends among the smugglers. If Jacurutu exists, they'll support themselves by selling spice. There'd be no other market for them except the smugglers."
    Halleck bowed his head briefly while his fingers said: "I've already set this course in motion, My Lady." And because he could not ignore the training of a lifetime, added: "Be very careful in this place. Alia is your enemy and most of the priesthood belongs to her."
    "Not Javid," Jessica's fingers responded. "He hates the Atreides. I doubt anyone but an adept could detect it, but I'm positive of it. He conspires and Alia doesn't know of it." 
    "I'm assigning additional guards to your person," Halleck said, speaking aloud, avoiding the light spark of displeasure which Jessica's eyes betrayed. "There are dangers, I'm certain. Will you spend the night here?"
    "We'll go later to Sietch Tabr," she said and hesitated, on the point of telling him not to send more guards, but she held her silence. Gurney's instincts were to be trusted. More than one Atreides had learned this, both to his pleasure and his sorrow. "I have one more meeting -- with the Master of Novitiates this time," she said. "That's the last one and I'll be happily shut of this place."

= = = = = =

And I beheld another beast coming up out of the sand; and he had two horns like a lamb, but his mouth was fanged and fiery as the dragon and his body shimmered and burned with great heat while it did hiss like the serpent.
-Revised Orange Catholic Bible

    He called himself The Preacher, and there had come to be an awesome fear among many on Arrakis that he might be Muad'Dib returned from the desert, not dead at all. Muad'Dib could be alive; for who had seen his body? For that matter, who saw any body that the desert took? But still -- Muad'Dib? Points of comparison could be made, although no one from the old days came forward and said: "Yes, I see that this is Muad'Dib. I know him."
    Still . . . Like Muad'Dib, The Preacher was blind, his eye sockets black and scarred in a way that could have been done by a stone burner. And his voice conveyed that crackling penetration, that same compelling force which demanded a response from deep within you. Many remarked this. He was lean, this Preacher, his leathery face seamed, his hair grizzled. But the deep desert did that to many people. You had only to look about you and see this proven. And there was another fact for contention: The Preacher was led by a young Fremen, a lad without known sietch who said, when questioned, that he worked for hire. It was argued that Muad'Dib, knowing the future, had not needed such a guide except at the very end, when his grief overcame him. But he'd needed a guide then; everyone knew it.
    The Preacher had appeared one winter morning in the streets of Arrakeen, a brown and ridge-veined hand on the shoulder of his young guide. The lad, who gave his name as Assan Tariq, moved through the flint-smelling dust of the early swarming, leading his charge with the practiced agility of the warren-born, never once losing contact.
    It was observed that the blind man wore a traditional bourka over a stillsuit which bore the mark about it of those once made only in the sietch caves of the deepest desert. It wasn't like the shabby suits being turned out these days. The nose tube, which captured moisture from his breath for the recycling layers beneath the bourka, was wrapped in braid, and it was the black vine braid so seldom seen anymore. The suit's mask across the lower half of his face carried green patches etched by the blown sand. All in all, this Preacher was a figure from Dune's past.
    Many among the early crowds of that winter day had noted his passage. After all, a blind Fremen remained a rarity. Fremen Law still consigned the blind to Shai-Hulud. The wording of the Law, although it was less honored in these modem, water-soft times, remained unchanged from the earliest days. The blind were a gift to Shai-Hulud. They were to be exposed in the open bled for the great worms to devour. When it was done -- and there were stories which got back to the cities -- it was always done out where the largest worms still ruled, those called Old Men of the Desert. A blind Fremen, then, was a curiosity, and people paused to watch the passing of this odd pair.
    The lad appeared about fourteen standard, one of the new breed who wore modified stillsuits; it left the face open to the moisture-robbing air. He had slender features, the all-blue spice-tinted eyes, a nubbin nose, and that innocuous look of innocence which so often masks cynical knowledge in the young. In contrast, the blind man was a reminder of times almost forgotten -- long in stride and with a wiriness that spoke of many years on the sand with only his feet or a captive worm to carry him. He held his head in that stiff-necked rigidity which some of the blind cannot put off. The hooded head moved only when he cocked an ear at an interesting sound.
    Through the day's gathering crowds the strange pair came, arriving at last on the steps which led up like terraced hectares to the escarpment which was Alia's Temple, a fitting companion to Paul's Keep. Up the steps The Preacher went until he and his young guide came to the third landing, where pilgrims of the Hajj awaited the morning opening of those gigantic doors above them. They were doors large enough to have admitted an entire cathedral from one of the ancient religions. Passing through them was said to reduce a pilgrim's soul to motedom, sufficiently small that it could pass through the eye of a needle and enter heaven.
    At the edge of the third landing The Preacher turned, and it was as though he looked about him, seeing with his empty eye sockets the foppish city dwellers, some of them Fremen, with garments which simulated stillsuits but were only decorative fabrics, seeing the eager pilgrims fresh off the Guild space transports and awaiting that first step on the devotion which would ensure them a place in paradise.
    The landing was a noisy place: there were Mahdi Spirit Cultists in green robes and carrying live hawks trained to screech a "call to heaven." Food was being sold by shouting vendors. Many things were being offered for sale, the voices shouting in competitive stridence: there was the Dune Tarot with its booklets of commentaries imprinted on shigawire. One vendor had exotic bits of cloth "guaranteed to have been touched by Muad'Dib himself!" Another had vials of water "certified to have come from Sietch Tabr, where Muad'Dib lived." Through it all there were conversations in a hundred or more dialects of Galach interspersed with harsh gutturals and squeaks of outrine languages which were gathered under the Holy Imperium. Face dancers and little people from the suspected artisan planets of the Tleilaxu bounced and gyrated through the throng in bright clothing. There were lean faces and fat, water-rich faces. The susurration of nervous feet came from the gritty plasteel which formed the wide steps. And occasionally a keening voice would rise out of the cacophony in prayer -- "Mua-a-a-ad'Dib! Mua-a-a-ad'Dib! Greet my soul's entreaty! You, who are God's anointed, greet my soul! Mua-a-a-ad'Dib!" 
    Nearby among the pilgrims, two mummers played for a few coins, reciting the lines of the currently popular "Disputation of Armistead and Leandgrah." 
    The Preacher cocked his head to listen.
    The Mummers were middle-aged city men with bored voices. At a word of command, the young guide described them for The Preacher. They were garbed in loose robes, not even deigning to simulate stillsuits on their water-rich bodies. Assan Tariq thought this amusing, but The Preacher reprimanded him.
    The mummer who played the part of Leandgrah was just concluding his oration: "Bah! The universe can be grasped only by the sentient hand. That hand is what drives your precious brain, and it drives everything else that derives from the brain. You see what you have created, you become sentient, only after the hand has done its work!" 
    A scattering of applause greeted his performance.
    The Preacher sniffed and his nostrils recorded the rich odors of this place: uncapped esters of poorly adjusted stillsuits, masking musks of diverse origin, the common flinty dust, exhalations of uncounted exotic diets, and the aromas of rare incense which already had been ignited within Alia's Temple and now drifted down over the steps in cleverly directed currents. The Preacher's thoughts were mirrored on his face as he absorbed his surroundings: We have come to this, we Fremen!
    A sudden diversion rippled through the crowd on the landing. Sand Dancers had come into the plaza at the foot of the steps, half a hundred of them tethered to each other by elacca ropes. They obviously had been dancing thus for days, seeking a state of ecstasy. Foam dribbled from their mouths as they jerked and stamped to their secret music. A full third of them dangled unconscious from the ropes, tugged back and forth by the others like dolls on strings. One of these dolls had come awake, though, and the crowd apparently knew what to expect.
    "I have see-ee-een!" the newly awakened dancer shrieked. "I have see-ee-een!" He resisted the pull of the other dancers, darted his wild gaze right and left. "Where this city is, there will be only sand! I have see-ee-een!"
    A great swelling laugh went up from the onlookers. Even the new pilgrims joined it.
    This was too much for The Preacher. He raised both arms and roared in a voice which surely had commanded worm riders: "Silence!" The entire throng in the plaza went still at that battle cry.
    The Preacher pointed a thin hand toward the dancers, and the illusion that he actually saw them was uncanny. "Did you not hear that man? Blasphemers and idolaters! All of you! The religion of Muad'Dib is not Muad'Dib. He spurns it as he spurns you! Sand will cover this place. Sand will cover you."
    Saying this, he dropped his arms, put a hand on his young guide's shoulder, and commanded: "Take me from this place." 
    Perhaps it was The Preacher's choice of words: He spurns it as he spurns you! Perhaps it was his tone, certainly something more than human, a vocality trained surely in the arts of the Bene Gesserit Voice which commanded by mere nuances of subtle inflection. Perhaps it was only the inherent mysticism of this place where Muad'Dib had lived and walked and ruled. Someone called out from the landing, shouting at The Preacher's receding back in a voice which trembled with religious awe: "Is that Muad'Dib come back to us?"
    The Preacher stopped, reached into the purse beneath his bourka, and removed an object which only those nearby recognized. It was a desert-mummified human hand, one of the planet's jokes on mortality which occasionally turned up in the sand and were universally regarded as communications from Shai-Hulud The hand had been desiccated into a tight fist which ended in white bone scarred by sandblast winds.
    "I bring the Hand of God, and that is all I bring!" The Preacher shouted. "I speak for the Hand of God. I am The Preacher."
    Some took him to mean that the hand was Muad'Dib's, but others fastened on that commanding presence and the terrible voice -- and that was how Arrakis came to know his name. But it was not the last time his voice was heard.

= = = = = =

It is commonly reported, my dear Georad, that there exists great natural virtue in the melange experience. Perhaps this is true. There remain within me, however, profound doubts that every use of melange always brings virtue. Me seems that certain persons have corrupted the use of melange in defiance of God. In the words of the Ecumenon, they have disfigured the soul. They skim the surface of melange and believe thereby to attain grace. They deride their fellows, do great harm to godliness, and they distort the meaning of this abundant gift maliciously, surely a mutilation beyond the power of man to restore. To be truly at one with the virtue of the spice, uncorrupted in all ways, full of goodly honor, a man must permit his deeds and his words to agree. When your actions describe a system of evil consequences, you should be judged by those consequences and not by your explanations. It is thus that we should judge Muad'Dib.
-The Pedant Heresy

    It was a small room tinged with the odor of ozone and reduced to a shadowy greyness by dimmed glowglobes and the metallic blue light of a single transeye-monitoring screen. The screen was about a meter wide and only two-thirds of a meter in height. It revealed in remote detail a barren, rocky valley with two Laza tigers feeding on the bloody remnants of a recent kill. On the hillside above the tigers could be seen a slender man in Sardaukar working uniform, Levenbrech insignia at his collar. He wore a servo-control keyboard against his chest.
    One veriform suspensor chair faced the screen, occupied by a fair-haired woman of indeterminate age. She had a heart-shaped face and slender hands which gripped the chair arms as she watched. The fullness of a white robe trimmed in gold concealed her figure. A pace to her right stood a blocky man dressed in the bronze and gold uniform of a Bashar Aide in the old Imperial Sardaukar. His greying hair had been closely cropped over square, emotionless features.
    The woman coughed, said: "It went as you predicted, Tyekanik."
    "Assuredly, Princess," the Bashar Aide said, his voice hoarse.
    She smiled at the tension in his voice, asked: "Tell me, Tyekanik, how will my son like the sound of Emperor Farad'n I?" 
    "The title suits him, Princess." 
    "That was not my question."
    "He might not approve some of the things done to gain him that, ahh, title."
    "Then again . . ." She turned, peered up through the gloom at him. "You served my father well. It was not your fault that he lost the throne to the Atreides. But surely the sting of that loss must be felt as keenly by you as by any --"
    "Does the Princess Wensicia have some special task for me?" Tyekanik asked. His voice remained hoarse, but there was a sharp edge to it now.
    "You have a bad habit of interrupting me," she said.
    Now he smiled, displaying thick teeth which glistened in the light from the screen. "At times you remind me of your father," he said. "Always these circumlocutions before a request for a delicate . . . ahh, assignment."
    She jerked her gaze away from him to conceal anger, asked: "Do you really think those Lazas will put my son on the throne?" 
    "It's distinctly possible, Princess. You must admit that the bastard get of Paul Atreides would be no more than juicy morsels for those two. And with those twins gone . . ." He shrugged.
    "The grandson of Shaddam IV becomes the logical successor," she said. "That is if we can remove the objections of the Fremen, the Landsraad and CHOAM, not to mention any surviving Atreides who might --"
    "Javid assures me that his people can take care of Alia quite easily. I do not count the Lady Jessica as an Atreides. Who else remains?"
    "Landsraad and CHOAM will go where the profit goes," she said, "but what of the Fremen?" 
    "We'll drown them in their Muad'Dib's religion!" 
    "Easier said than done, my dear Tyekanik." 
    "I see," he said. "We're back to that old argument." 
    "House Corrino has done worse things to gain power," she said.
    "But to embrace this . . . this Mahdi's religion!"
    "My son respects you," she said.
    "Princess, I long for the day when House Corrino returns to its rightful seat of power. So does every remaining Sardaukar here on Salusa. But if you --"
    "Tyekanik! This is the planet Salusa Secundus. Do not fall into the lazy ways which spread through our Imperium. Full name, complete title -- attention to every detail. Those attributes will send the Atreides lifeblood into the sands of Arrakis. Every detail, Tyekanik!"
    He knew what she was doing with this attack. It was part of the shifty trickiness she'd learned from her sister, Irulan. But he felt himself losing ground.
    "Do you hear me, Tyekanik?" 
    "I hear, Princess." 
    "I want you to embrace this Muad'Dib religion," she said. 
    "Princess, I would walk into fire for you, but this . . ." 
    "That is an order, Tyekanik!"
    He swallowed, stared into the screen. The Laza tigers had finished feeding and now lay on the sand completing their toilet, long tongues moving across their forepaws. 
    "An order, Tyekanik -- do you understand me?" 
    "I hear and obey, Princess." His voice did not change tone. 
    She sighed. "Ohh, if my father were only alive . . ." 
    "Yes, Princess."
    "Don't mock me, Tyekanik. I know how distasteful this is to you. But if you set the example . . ." 
    "He may not follow, Princess."
    "He'll follow." She pointed at the screen. "It occurs to me that the Levenbrech out there could be a problem." 
    "A problem? How is that?" 
    "How many people know this thing of the tigers?" 
    "That Levenbrech who is their trainer . . . one transport pilot, you, and of course . . ." He tapped his own chest. 
    "What about the buyers?" 
    "They know nothing. What is it you fear, Princess?" 
    "My son is, well, sensitive." 
    "Sardaukar do not reveal secrets," he said.
    "Neither do dead men." She reached forward and depressed a red key beneath the lighted screen.
    Immediately the Laza tigers raised their heads. They got to their feet and looked up the hill at the Levenbrech. Moving as one, they turned and began a scrambling run up the hillside.
    Appearing calm at first, the Levenbrech depressed a key on his console. His movements were assured but, as the cats continued their dash toward him, he became more frenzied, pressing the key harder and harder. A look of startled awareness came over his features and his hand jerked toward the working knife at his waist. The movement came too late. A raking claw hit his chest and sent him sprawling. As he fell, the other tiger took his neck in one great-fanged bite and shook him. His spine snapped.
    "Attention to detail," the Princess said. She turned, stiffened as Tyekanik drew his knife. But he presented the blade to her, handle foremost.
    "Perhaps you'd like to use my knife to attend to another detail," he said.
    "Put that back in its sheath and don't act the fool!" she raged. "Sometimes, Tyekanik, you try me to the --"
    "That was a good man out there, Princess. One of my best." 
    "One of my best," she corrected him.
    He drew a deep, trembling breath, sheathed his knife. "And what of my transport pilot?"
    "This will be ascribed to an accident," she said. "You will advise him to employ the utmost caution when he brings those tigers back to us. And of course, when he has delivered our pets to Javid's people on the transport . . ." She looked at his knife. 
    "Is that an order, Princess?" 
    "It is."
    "Shall I, then, fall on my knife, or will you take care of that, ahhh, detail?"
    She spoke with a false calm, her voice heavy: "Tyekanik, were I not absolutely convinced that you would fall on your knife at my command, you would not be standing here beside me -- armed."
    He swallowed, stared at the screen. The tigers once more were feeding.
    She refused to look at the scene, continued to stare at Tyekanik as she said: "You will, as well, tell our buyers not to bring us any more matched pairs of children who fit the necessary description." 
    "As you command, Princess." 
    "Don't use that tone with me, Tyekanik." 
    "Yes, Princess."
    Her lips drew into a straight line. Then: "How many more of those paired costumes do we have?"
    "Six sets of the robes, complete with stillsuits and the sand shoes, all with the Atreides insignia worked into them." 
    "Fabrics as rich as the ones on that pair?" she nodded toward the screen.
    "Fit for royalty, Princess."
    "Attention to detail," she said. "The garments will be dispatched to Arrakis as gifts for our royal cousins. They will be gifts from my son, do you understand me, Tyekanik?" 
    "Completely, Princess."
    "Have him inscribe a suitable note. It should say that he sends these few paltry garments as tokens of his devotion to House Atreides. Something on that order." 
    "And the occasion?"
    "There must be a birthday or holy day or something, Tyekanik. I leave that to you. I trust you, my friend." 
    He stared at her silently.
    Her face hardened. "Surely you must know that? Who else can I trust since the death of my husband?"
    He shrugged, thinking how closely she emulated the spider. It would not do to get on intimate terms with her, as he now suspected his Levenbrech had done.
    "And Tyekanik," she said, "one more detail." 
    "Yes, Princess."
    "My son is being trained to rule. There will come a time when he must grasp the sword in his own hands. You will know when that moment arrives. I'll wish to be informed immediately." 
    "As you command, Princess."
    She leaned back, peered knowingly at Tyekanik. "You do not approve of me, I know that. It is unimportant to me as long as you remember the lesson of the Levenbrech."
    "He was very good with animals, but disposable; yes, Princess." 
    "That is not what I mean!" 
    "It isn't? Then . . . I don't understand."
    "An army," she said, "is composed of disposable, completely replaceable parts. That is the lesson of the Levenbrech." 
    "Replaceable parts," he said. "Including the supreme command?"
    "Without the supreme command there is seldom a reason for an army, Tyekanik. That is why you will immediately embrace this Mahdi religion and, at the same time, begin the campaign to convert my son."
    "At once, Princess. I presume you don't want me to stint his education in the other martial arts at the expense of this, ahh, religion?"
    She pushed herself out of the chair, strode around him, paused at the door, and spoke without looking back. "Someday you will try my patience once too often, Tyekanik." With that, she let herself out.

= = = = = =

Either we abandon the long-honored Theory of Relativity, or we cease to believe that we can engage in continued accurate prediction of the future. Indeed, knowing the future raises a host of questions which cannot be answered under conventional assumptions unless one first projects an Observer outside of Time and, second, nullifies all movement. If you accept the Theory of Relativity, it can be shown that Time and the Observer must stand still in relationship to each or inaccuracies will intervene. This would seem to say that it is impossible to engage in accurate prediction of the future. How, then, do we explain the continued seeking after this visionary goal by respected scientists? How, then, do we explain Muad'Dib?
-Lectures on Prescience by Harq al-Ada

    "I must tell you something," Jessica said, "even though I know my telling will remind you of many experiences from our mutual past, and that this will place you in jeopardy." 
    She paused to see how Ghanima was taking this.
    They sat alone, just the two of them, occupying low cushions in a chamber of Sietch Tabr. It had required considerable skill to maneuver this meeting, and Jessica was not at all certain that she had been alone in the maneuvering. Ghanima had seemed to anticipate and augment every step.
    It was almost two hours after daylight, and the excitements of greeting and all of the recognitions were past. Jessica forced her pulse back to a steady pace and focused her attention into this rock-walled room with its dark hangings and yellow cushions. To meet the accumulated tensions, she found herself for the first time in years recalling the Litany Against Fear from the Bene Gesserit rite.
    "I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain. "
    She did this silently and took a deep, calming breath.
    "It helps at times," Ghanima said. "The Litany, I mean." 
    Jessica closed her eyes to hide the shock of this insight. It had been a long time since anyone had been able to read her that intimately. The realization was disconcerting, especially when it was ignited by an intellect which hid behind a mask of childhood.
    Having faced her fear, though, Jessica opened her eyes and knew the source of turmoil: I fear for my grandchildren. Neither of these children betrayed the stigmata of Abomination which Alia flaunted, although Leto showed every sign of some terrifying concealment. It was for that reason he'd been deftly excluded from this meeting.
    On impulse, Jessica put aside her ingrained emotional masks, knowing them to be of little use here, barriers to communication. Not since those loving moments with her Duke had she lowered these barriers, and she found the action both relief and pain. There remained facts which no curse or prayer or litany could wash from existence. Flight would not leave such facts behind. They could not be ignored. Elements of Paul's vision had been rearranged and the times had caught up with his children. They were a magnet in the void; evil and all the sad misuses of power collected around them.
    Ghanima, watching the play of emotions across her grandmother's face, marveled that Jessica had let down her controls.
    With catching movements of their heads remarkably synchronized, both turned, eyes met, and they stared deeply, probingly at each other. Thoughts without spoken words passed between them.
    Jessica: I wish you to see my fear. 
    Ghanima: Now I know you love me. 
    It was a swift moment of utter trust.
    Jessica said: "When your father was but a boy, I brought a Reverend Mother to Caladan to test him." 
    Ghanima nodded. The memory of it was extremely vivid.
    "We Bene Gesserits were already cautious to make sure that the children we raised were human and not animal. One cannot always tell by exterior appearances."
    "It's the way you were trained," Ghanima said, and the memory flooded into her mind: that old Bene Gesserit, Gaius Helen Mohiam. She'd come to Castle Caladan with her poisoned gom jabbar and her box of burning pain. Paul's hand (Ghanima's own hand in the shared memory) screamed with the agony of that box while the old woman talked calmly of immediate death if the hand were withdrawn from the pain. And there had been no doubt of the death in that needle held ready against the child's neck while the aged voice droned its rationale:
    "You've heard of animals chewing off a leg to escape a trap. There's an animal kind of trick. A human would remain in the trap, endure the pain, feigning death that he might kill the trapper and remove a threat to his kind."
    Ghanima shook her head against the remembered pain. The burning! The burning! Paul had imagined his skin curling black on that agonized hand within the box, flesh crisping and dropping away until only charred bones remained. And it had been a trick -- the hand unharmed. But sweat stood out on Ghanima's forehead at the memory.
    "Of course you remember this in a way that I cannot," Jessica said.
    For a moment, memory-driven, Ghanima saw her grandmother in a different light: what this woman might do out of the driving necessities of that early conditioning in the Bene Gesserit schools! It raised new questions about Jessica's return to Arrakis.
    "It would be stupid to repeat such a test on you or your brother," Jessica said. "You already know the way it went. I must assume you are human, that you will not misuse your inherited powers." 
    "But you don't make that assumption at all," Ghanima said.
    Jessica blinked, realized that the barriers had been creeping back in place, dropped them once more. She asked: "Will you believe my love for you?"
    "Yes." Ghanima raised a hand as Jessica started to speak. "But that love wouldn't stop you from destroying us. Oh, I know the reasoning: 'Better the animal-human die than it re-create itself.' And that's especially true if the animal-human bears the name Atreides."
    "You at least are human," Jessica blurted. "I trust my instinct on this."
    Ghanima saw the truth in this, said: "But you're not sure of Leto." 
    "I'm not." 
    "Abomination?" 
    Jessica could only nod.
    Ghanima said: "Not yet, at least. We both know the danger of it, though. We can see the way of it in Alia."
    Jessica cupped her hands over her eyes, thought: Even love can't protect us from unwanted facts. And she knew then that she still loved her daughter, crying out silently against fate: Alia! Oh, Alia! I am sorry for my part in your destruction. 
    Ghanima cleared her throat loudly.
    Jessica lowered her hands, thought: I may mourn my poor daughter, but there are other necessities now. She said: "So you've recognized what happened to Alia."
    "Leto and I watched it happen. We were powerless to prevent it, although we discussed many possibilities." 
    "You're sure that your brother is free of this curse?" 
    "I'm sure."
    The quiet assurance in that statement could not be denied. Jessica found herself accepting it. Then: "How is it you've escaped?"
    Ghanima explained the theory upon which she and Leto had settled, that their avoiding of the spice trance while Alia entered it often made the difference. She went on to reveal his dreams and the plans they'd discussed -- even Jacurutu.
    Jessica nodded. "Alia is an Atreides, though, and that poses enormous problems."
    Ghanima fell silent before the sudden realization that Jessica still mourned her Duke as though his death had been but yesterday, that she would guard his name and memory against all threats. Personal memories from the Duke's own lifetime fled through Ghanima's awareness to reinforce this assessment, to soften it with understanding.
    "Now," Jessica said, voice brisk, "what about this Preacher? I heard some disquieting reports yesterday after that damnable Lustration." 
    Ghanima shrugged. "He could be --" 
    "Paul?" 
    "Yes, but we haven't seen him to examine." 
    "Javid laughs at the rumors," Jessica said. 
    Ghanima hesitated. Then: "Do you trust this Javid?" 
    A grim smile touched Jessica's lips. "No more than you do." 
    "Leto says Javid laughs at the wrong things," Ghanima said.
    "So much for Javid's laughter," Jessica said. "But do you actually entertain the notion that my son is still alive, that he has returned in this guise?"
    "We say it's possible. And Leto . . ." Ghanima found her mouth suddenly dry, remembered fears clutching her breast. She forced herself to overcome them, recounted Leto's other revelations of prescient dreams.
    Jessica moved her head from side to side as though wounded.
    Ghanima said: "Leto says he must find this Preacher and make sure."
    "Yes . . . Of course. I should never have left here. It was cowardly of me."
    "Why do you blame yourself? You had reached a limit. I know that. Leto knows it. Even Alia may know it." 
    Jessica put a hand to her own throat, rubbed it briefly. Then: "Yes, the problem of Alia."
    "She works a strange attraction on Leto," Ghanima said. "That's why I helped you meet alone with me. He agrees that she is beyond hope, but still he finds ways to be with her and . . . study her. And . . . it's very disturbing. When I try to talk against this, he falls asleep. He --" 
    "Is she drugging him?"
    "No-o-o." Ghanima shook her head. "But he has this odd empathy for her. And . . . in his sleep, he often mutters Jacurutu."
    "That again!" And Jessica found herself recounting Gurney's report about the conspirators exposed at the landing field.
    "I sometimes fear Alia wants Leto to seek out Jacurutu," Ghanima said. "And I always thought it only a legend. You know it, of course." 
    Jessica shuddered. "Terrible story. Terrible." 
    "What must we do?" Ghanima asked. "I fear to search all of my memories, all of my lives . . ." 
    "Ghani! I warn you against that. You mustn't risk --" 
    "It may happen even if I don't risk it. How do we know what really happened to Alia?"
    "No! You could be spared that . . . that possession." She ground the word out. "Well . . . Jacurutu, is it? I've sent Gurney to find the place -- if it exists." 
    "But how can he . . . Oh! Of course: the smugglers." 
    Jessica found herself silenced by this further example of how Ghanima's mind worked in concert with what must be an inner awareness of others. Of me! How truly strange it was, Jessica thought, that this young flesh could carry all of Paul's memories, at least until the moment of Paul's spermal separation from his own past. It was an invasion of privacy against which something primal in Jessica rebelled. Momentarily she felt herself sinking into the absolute and unswerving Bene Gesserit judgment: Abomination! But there was a sweetness about this child, a willingness to sacrifice for her brother, which could not be denied.
    We are one life reaching out into a dark future, Jessica thought. We are one blood. And she girded herself to accept the events which she and Gurney Halleck had set in motion. Leto must be separated from his sister, must be trained as the Sisterhood insisted.

= = = = = =

I hear the wind blowing across the desert and I see the moons of a winter night rising tike great ships in the void. To them I make my vow: I will be resolute and make an art of government; I will balance my inherited past and become a perfect storehouse of my relic memories. And I will be known for kindliness more than for knowledge. My face will shine down the corridors of time for as long as humans exist.
-Leto's Vow, After Harq al-Ada

    When she had been quite young, Alia Atreides had practiced for hours in the prana-bindu trance, trying to strengthen her own private personality against the onslaught of all those others. She knew the problem -- melange could not be escaped in a sietch warren. It infested everything: food, water, air, even the fabrics against which she cried at night. Very early she recognized the uses of the sietch orgy where the tribe drank the death-water of a worm. In the orgy, Fremen released the accumulated pressures of their own genetic memories, and they denied those memories. She saw her companions being temporarily possessed in the orgy.
    For her, there was no such release, no denial. She had possessed full consciousness long before birth. With that consciousness came a cataclysmic awareness of her circumstances: womb-locked into intense, inescapable contact with the personas of all her ancestors and of those identities death-transmitted in spice-tau to the Lady Jessica. Before birth, Alia had contained every bit of the knowledge required in a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother -- plus much, much more from all those others.
    In that knowledge lay recognition of a terrible reality -- Abomination. The totality of that knowledge weakened her. The pre-born did not escape. Still she'd fought against the more terrifying of her ancestors, winning for a time a Pyrrhic victory which had lasted through childhood. She'd known a private personality, but it had no immunity against casual intrusions from those who lived their reflected lives through her.
    Thus will I be one day, she thought. This thought chilled her. To walk and dissemble through the life of a child from her own loins, intruding, grasping at consciousness to add a quantum of experience.
    Fear stalked her childhood. It persisted into puberty. She had fought it, never asking for help. Who would understand the help she required? Not her mother, who could never quite drive away that specter of Bene Gesserit judgment: the pre-born were Abomination.
    There had come that night when her brother walked alone into the desert seeking death, giving himself to Shai-Hulud as blind Fremen were supposed to do. Within the month, Alia had been married to Paul's swordmaster, Duncan Idaho, a mentat brought back from the dead by the arts of the Tleilaxu. Her mother fled back to Caladan. Paul's twins were Alia's legal charge. 
    And she controlled the Regency.
    Pressures of responsibility had driven the old fears away and she had been wide open to the inner lives, demanding their advice, plunging into spice trance in search of guiding visions.
    The crisis came on a day like many others in the spring month of Laab, a clear morning at Muad'Dib's Keep with a cold wind blowing down from the pole. Alia still wore the yellow for mourning, the color of the sterile sun. More and more these past few weeks she'd been denying the inner voice of her mother, who tended to sneer at preparation for the coming Holy Days to be centered on the Temple.
    The inner-awareness of Jessica faded, faded . . . sinking away at last with a faceless demand that Alia would be better occupied working on the Atreides Law. New lives began to clamor for their moment of consciousness. Alia felt that she had opened a bottomless pit, and faces arose out of it like a swarm of locusts, until she came at last to focus on one who was like a beast: the old Baron Harkonnen. In terrified outrage she had screamed out against all of that inner clamor, winning a temporary silence.
    On this morning, Alia took her pre-breakfast walk through the Keep's roof garden. In a new attempt to win the inner battle, she tried to hold her entire awareness within Choda's admonition to the Zensunni:
    "Leaving the ladder, one may fall upward!" 
    But morning's glow along the cliffs of the Shield Wall kept distracting her. Plantings of resilient fuzz-grass filled the garden's pathways. When she looked away from the Shield Wall she saw dew on the grass, the catch of all the moisture which had passed here in the night. It reflected her own passage as of a multitude.
    That multitude made her giddy. Each reflection carried the imprint of a face from the inner multitude.
    She tried to focus her mind on what the grass implied. The presence of plentiful dew told her how far the ecological transformation had progressed on Arrakis. The climate of these northern latitudes was growing warmer; atmospheric carbon dioxide was on the increase. She reminded herself how many new hectares would be put under green plants in the coming year -- and it required thirty-seven thousand cubic feet of water to irrigate just one hectare.
    Despite every attempt at mundane thoughts, she could not drive away the sharklike circling of all those others within her. 
    She put her hands to her forehead and pressed.
    Her temple guards had brought her a prisoner to judge at sunset the previous day: one Essas Paymon, a dark little man ostensibly in the pay of a house minor, the Nebiros, who traded in holy artifacts and small manufactured items for decoration. Actually Paymon was known to be a CHOAM spy whose task was to assess the yearly spice crop. Alia had been on the point of sending him into the dungeons when he'd protested loudly "the injustice of the Atreides." That could have brought him an immediate sentence of death on the hanging tripod, but Alia had been caught by his boldness. She'd spoken sternly from her Throne of Judgment, trying to frighten him into revealing more than he'd already told her inquisitors.
    "Why are our spice crops of such interest to the Combine Honnete?" she demanded. "Tell us and we may spare you." 
    "I only collect something for which there is a market," Paymon said. "I know nothing of what is done with my harvest." 
    "And for this petty profit you interfere with our royal plans?" Alia demanded.
    "Royalty never considers that we might have plans, too," he countered.
    Alia, captivated by his desperate audacity, said: "Essas Paymon, will you work for me?"
    At this a grin whitened his dark face, and he said; "You were about to obliterate me without a qualm. What is my new value that you should suddenly make a market for it?"
    "You've a simple and practical value," she said. "You're bold and you're for hire to the highest bidder. I can bid higher than any other in the Empire."
    At which, he named a remarkable sum which he required for his services, but Alia laughed and countered with a figure she considered more reasonable and undoubtedly far more than he'd ever before received. She added: "And, of course, I throw in the gift of your life upon which, I presume, you place an even more inordinate value."
    "A bargain!" Paymon cried and, at a signal from Alia, was led away by her priestly Master of Appointments, Ziarenko Javid.
    Less than an hour later, as Alia prepared to leave the Judgment Hall, Javid came hurrying to report that Paymon had been overheard to mutter the fateful lines from the Orange Catholic Bible: "Maleficos non patieris vivere. "
    "Thou shall not suffer a witch to live," Alia translated. So that was his gratitude! He was one of those who plotted against her very life! In a flush of rage such as she'd never before experienced, she ordered Pay men's immediate execution, sending his body to the Temple deathstill where his water, at least, would be of some value in the priestly coffers.
    And all night long Paymon's dark face haunted her.
    She tried all of her tricks against this persistent, accusing image, reciting the Bu Ji from the Fremen Book of Kreos: "Nothing occurs! Nothing occurs!" But Paymon took her through a wearing night into this giddy new day, where she could see that his face had joined those in the jeweled reflections from the dew.
    A female guard called her to breakfast from the roof door behind a low hedge of mimosa. Alia sighed. She felt small choice between hells: the outcry within her mind or the outcry from her attendants -- all were pointless voices, but persistent in their demands, hourglass noises that she would like to silence with the edge of a knife.
    Ignoring the guard, Alia stared across the roof garden toward the Shield Wall. A bahada had left its broad outwash like a detrital fan upon the sheltered floor of her domain. The delta of sand spread out before her gaze, outlined by the morning sun. It came to her that an uninitiated eye might see that broad fan as evidence of a river's flow, but it was no more than the place where her brother had shattered the Shield Wall with the Atreides Family atomics, opening a path from the desert for the sandworms which had carried his Fremen troops to shocking victory over his Imperial predecessor, Shaddam IV. Now a broad qanat flowed with water on the Shield Wall's far side to block off sandworm intrusions. Sandworms would not cross open water; it poisoned them.
    Would that I had such a barrier within my mind, she thought.
    The thought increased her giddy sensation of being separated from reality.
    Sandworms! Sandworms!
    Her memory presented a collection of sandworm images: mighty Shai-Hulud, the demiurge of the Fremen, deadly beast of the desert's depths whose outpourings included the priceless spice. How odd it was, this sandworm, to grow from a flat and leathery sandtrout, she thought. They were like the flocking multitude within her awareness. The sandtrout, when linked edge to edge against the planet's bedrock, formed living cisterns; they held back the water that their sandworm vector might live. Alia could feel the analogy: some of those others within her mind held back dangerous forces which could destroy her.
    Again the guard called her to breakfast, a note of impatience apparent.
    Angrily Alia turned, waved a dismissal signal. 
    The guard obeyed, but the roof door slammed.
    At the sound of the slamming door, Alia felt herself caught by everything she had attempted to deny. The other lives welled up within her like a hideous tide. Each demanding life pressed its face against her vision centers -- a cloud of faces. Some presented mange-spotted skin, other were callous and full of sooty shadows; there were mouths like moist lozenges. The pressure of the swarm washed over her in a current which demanded that she float free and plunge into them.
    "No," she whispered. "No . . . no . . . no . . ." 
    She would have collapsed onto the path but for a bench beside her which accepted her sagging body. She tried to sit, could not, stretched out on the cold plasteel, still whispering denial. 
    The tide continued to rise within her.
    She felt attuned to the slightest show of attention, aware of the risk, but alert for every exclamation from those guarded mouths which clamored within her. They were a cacophony of demand for her attention: "Me! Me!" "No, me!" And she knew that if she once gave her attention, gave it completely, she would be lost. To behold one face out of the multitude and follow the voice of that face would be to be held by the egocentrism which shared her existence. 
    "Prescience does this to you," a voice whispered.
    She covered her ears with her hands, thinking: I'm not prescient! The trance doesn't work for me!
    But the voice persisted: "It might work, if you had help." 
    "No . . . no," she whispered.
    Other voices wove around her mind: "I, Agamemnon, your ancestor, demand audience!"
    "No . . . no. "She pressed her hands against her ears until the flesh answered her with pain.
    An insane cackle within her head asked: "What has become of Ovid? Simple. He's John Bartlett's ibid!"
    The names were meaningless in her extremity. She wanted to scream against them and against all the other voices but could not find her own voice.
    Her guard, sent back to the roof by senior attendants, peered once more from the doorway behind the mimosa, saw Alia on the bench, spoke to a companion: "Ahhh, she is resting. You noted that she didn't sleep well last night. It is good for her to take the zaha, the morning siesta."
    Alia did not hear her guard. Her awareness was caught by shrieks of singing: "Merry old birds are we, hurrah!" the voices echoed against the inside of her skull and she thought: I'm going insane. I'm losing my mind.
    Her feet made feeble fleeing motions against the bench. She felt that if she could only command her body to run, she might escape. She had to escape lest any part of that inner tide sweep her into silence, forever contaminating her soul. But her body would not obey. The mightiest forces in the Imperial universe would obey her slightest whim, but her body would not.
    An inner voice chuckled. Then: "From one viewpoint, child, each incident of creation represents a catastrophe." It was a basso voice which rumbled against her eyes, and again that chuckle as though deriding its own pontification. "My dear child, I will help you, but you must help me in return."
    Against the swelling background clamor behind that basso voice, Alia spoke through chattering teeth: "Who . . . who . . ." 
    A face formed itself upon her awareness. It was a smiling face of such fatness that it could have been a baby's except for the glittering eagerness of the eyes. She tried to pull back, but achieved only a longer view which included the body attached to that face. The body was grossly, immensely fat, clothed in a robe which revealed by subtle bulges beneath it that this fat had required the support of portable suspensors.
    "You see," the basso voice rumbled, "it is only your maternal grandfather. You know me. I was the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen." 
    "You're . . . you're dead!" she gasped.
    "But, of course, my dear! Most of us within you are dead. But none of the others are really willing to help you. They don't understand you." 
    "Go away," she pleaded. "Oh, please go away." 
    "But you need help, granddaughter," the Baron's voice argued.
    How remarkable he looks, she thought, watching the projection of the Baron against her closed eyelids.
    "I'm willing to help you," the Baron wheedled. "The others in here would only fight to take over your entire consciousness. Any one of them would try to drive you out. But me . . . I want only a little corner of my own."
    Again the other lives within her lifted their clamor. The tide once more threatened to engulf her and she heard her mother's voice screeching. And Alia thought: She's not dead. 
    "Shut up!" the Baron commanded.
    Alia felt her own desires reinforcing that command, making it felt throughout her awareness.
    Inner silence washed through her like a cool bath and she felt her hammering heart begin slowing to its normal pace. Soothingly the Baron's voice intruded: "You see? Together, we're invincible. You help me and I help you." 
    "What . . . what do you want?" she whispered.
    A pensive look came over the fat face against her closed eyelids. "Ahhh, my darling granddaughter," he said, "I wish only a few simple pleasures. Give me but an occasional moment of contact with your senses. No one else need ever know. Let me feel but a small corner of your life when, for example, you are enfolded in the arms of your lover. Is that not a small price to ask?" 
    "Y-yes."
    "Good, good," the Baron chortled. "In return, my darling granddaughter, I can serve you in many ways. I can advise you, help you with my counsel. You will be invincible within and without. You will sweep away all opposition. History will forget your brother and cherish you. The future will be yours." 
    "You . . . won't let . . . the . . . the others take over?" 
    "They cannot stand against us! Singly we can be overcome, but together we command. I will demonstrate. Listen." 
    And the Baron fell silent, withdrawing his image, his inner presence. Not one memory, face, or voice of the other lives intruded.
    Alia allowed herself a trembling sigh.
    Accompanying that sigh came a thought. It forced itself into her awareness as though it were her own, but she sensed silent voices behind it.
    The old Baron was evil. He murdered your father. He would've killed you and Paul. He tried to and failed.
    The Baron's voice came to her without a face: "Of course I would've killed you. Didn't you stand in my way? But that argument is ended. You've won it, child! You're the new truth." 
    She felt herself nodding and her cheek moved scratchingly against the harsh surface of the bench.
    His words were reasonable, she thought. A Bene Gesserit precept reinforced the reasonable character of his words: "The purpose of argument is to change the nature of truth."
    Yes . . . that was the way the Bene Gesserit would have it.
    "Precisely!" the Baron said. "And I am dead while you are alive. I have only a fragile existence. I'm a mere memory-self within you. I am yours to command. And how little I ask in return for the profound advice which is mine to deliver." 
    "What do you advise me to do now?" she asked, testing.
    "You're worried about the judgment you gave last night," he said. "You wonder if Paymon's words were reported truthfully. Perhaps Javid saw in this Paymon a threat to his position of trust. Is this not the doubt which assails you?" 
    "Y-yes."
    "And your doubt is based on acute observation, is it not? Javid behaves with increasing intimacy toward your person. Even Duncan has noted it, hasn't he?" 
    "You know he has." 
    "Very well, then. Take Javid for your lover and --" 
    "No!"
    "You worry about Duncan? But your husband is a mentat mystic. He cannot be touched or harmed by activities of the flesh. Have you not felt sometimes how distant he is from you?" 
    "B-but he . . ."
    "Duncan's mentat part would understand should he ever have need to know the device you employed in destroying Javid." 
    "Destroy . . ."
    "Certainly! Dangerous tools may be used, but they should be cast aside when they grow too dangerous." 
    "Then . . . why should . . . I mean . . ."
    "Ahhh, you precious dunce! Because of the value contained in the lesson."
    "I don't understand."
    "Values, my dear grandchild, depend for their acceptance upon their success. Javid's obedience must be unconditional, his acceptance of your authority absolute, and his --" 
    "The morality of this lesson escapes --"
    "Don't be dense, grandchild! Morality must always be based on practicality. Render unto Caesar and all that nonsense. A victory is useless unless it reflects your deepest wishes. Is it not true that you have admired Javid's manliness?"
    Alia swallowed, hating the admission, but forced to it by her complete nakedness before the inner-watcher. "Ye-es." 
    "Good!" How jovial the word sounded within her head. "Now we begin to understand each other. When you have him helpless, then, in your bed, convinced that you are his thrall, you will ask him about Paymon. Do it jokingly: a rich laugh between you. And when he admits the deception, you will slip a crysknife between his ribs. Ahhh, the flow of blood can add so much to your satis --"
    "No," she whispered, her mouth dry with horror. "No . . . no . . . no . . ."
    "Then I will do it for you," the Baron argued. "It must be done; you admit that. If you but set up the conditions, I will assume temporary sway over . . ." 
    "No!"
    "Your fear is so transparent, granddaughter. My sway of your senses cannot be else but temporary. There are others, now, who could mimic you to a perfection that . . . But you know this. With me, ahhh, people would spy out my presence immediately. You know the Fremen Law for those possessed. You'd be slain out of hand. Yes -- even you. And you know I do not want that to happen. I'll take care of Javid for you and, once it's done, I'll step aside. You need only . . ." 
    "How is this good advice?"
    "It rids you of a dangerous tool. And, child, it sets up the working relationship between us, a relationship which can only teach you well about future judgments which --" 
    "Teach me?" 
    "Naturally!"
    Alia put her hands over her eyes, trying to think, knowing that any thought might be known to this presence within her, that a thought might originate with that presence and be taken as her own.
    "You worry yourself needlessly," the Baron wheedled. "This Paymon fellow, now, was --"
    "What I did was wrong! I was tired and acted hastily. I should've sought confirmation of --"
    "You did right! Your judgments cannot be based on any such foolish abstract as that Atreides notion of equality. That's what kept you sleepless, not Paymon's death. You made a good decision! He was another dangerous tool. You acted to maintain order in your society. Now there's a good reason for judgments, not this justice nonsense! There's no such thing as equal justice anywhere. It's unsettling to a society when you try to achieve such a false balance."
    Alia felt pleasure at this defense of her judgment against Paymon, but shocked at the amoral concept behind the argument. "Equal justice was an Atreides . . . was . . . " She took her hands from her eyes, but kept her eyes closed.
    "All of your priestly judges should be admonished about this error," the Baron argued. "Decisions must be weighed only as to their merit in maintaining an orderly society. Past civilizations without number have foundered on the rocks of equal justice. Such foolishness destroys the natural hierarchies which are far more important. Any individual takes on significance only in his relationship to your total society. Unless that society be ordered in logical steps, no one can find a place in it -- not the lowliest or the highest. Come, come, grandchild! You must be the stern mother of your people. It's your duty to maintain order." 
    "Everything Paul did was to . . ." 
    "Your brother's dead, a failure!" 
    "So are you!"
    "True . . . but with me it was an accident beyond my designing. Come now, let us take care of this Javid as I have outlined for you."
    She felt her body grow warm at the thought, spoke quickly: "I must think about it." And she thought: If it's done, it'll be only to put Javid in his place. No need to kill him for that. And the fool might just give himself away . . . in my bed. 
    "To whom do you talk, My Lady?" a voice asked.
    For a confused moment, Alia thought this another intrusion by those clamorous multitudes within, but recognition of the voice opened her eyes. Ziarenka Valefor, chief of Alia's guardian amazons, stood beside the bench, a worried frown on her weathered Fremen features.
    "I speak to my inner voices," Alia said, sitting up on the bench. She felt refreshed, buoyed up by the silencing of that distracting inner clamor.
    "Your inner voices, My Lady. Yes." Ziarenka's eyes glistened at this information. Everyone knew the Holy Alia drew upon inner resources available to no other person.
    "Bring Javid to my quarters," Alia said. "There's a serious matter I must discuss with him." 
    "To your quarters, My Lady?" 
    "Yes! To my private chamber." 
    "As My Lady commands." The guard turned to obey.
    "One moment," Alia said. "Has Master Idaho already gone to Sietch Tabr?"
    "Yes, My Lady. He left before dawn as you instructed. Do you wish me to send for . . ."
    "No. I will manage this myself. And Zia, no one must know that Javid is being brought to me. Do it yourself. This is a very serious matter."
    The guard touched the crysknife at her waist. "My Lady, is there a threat to --" 
    "Yes, there's a threat, and Javid may be at the heart of it." 
    "Ohhh, My Lady, perhaps I should not bring --" 
    "Zia! Do you think me incapable of handling such a one?" 
    A lupine smile touched the guard's mouth. "Forgive me, My Lady. I will bring him to your private chamber at once, but . . . with My Lady's permission, I will mount guard outside your door." 
    "You only," Alia said.
    "Yes, My Lady. I go at once."
    Alia nodded to herself, watching Ziarenka's retreating back. Javid was not loved among her guards, then. Another mark against him. But he was still valuable -- very valuable. He was her key to Jacurutu and with that place, well . . .
    "Perhaps you were right, Baron," she whispered.
    "You see!" the voice within her chortled. "Ahhh, this will be a pleasant service to you, child, and it's only the beginning . . ."

= = = = = =

These are illusions of popular history which a successful religion must promote: Evil men never prosper; only the brave deserve the fair; honesty is the best policy; actions speak louder than words; virtue always triumphs; a good deed is its own reward; any bad human can be reformed; religious talismans protect one from demon possession; only females understand the ancient mysteries; the rich are doomed to unhappiness . . .
-From the Instruction Manual: Missionaria Protectiva

    "I am called Muriz," the leathery Fremen said.
    He sat on cavern rock in the glow of a spice lamp whose fluttering light revealed damp walls and dark holes which were passages from this place. Sounds of dripping water could be heard down one of those passages and, although water sounds were essential to the Fremen paradise, the six bound men facing Muriz took no pleasure from the rhythmic dripping. There was the musty smell of a deathstill in the chamber.
    A youth of perhaps fourteen standard years came out of the passage and stood at Muriz's left hand. An unsheathed crysknife reflected pale yellow from the spice lamp as the youth lifted the blade and pointed it briefly at each of the bound men.
    With a gesture toward the youth, Muriz said: "This is my son, Assan Tariq, who is about to undergo his test of manhood." 
    Muriz cleared his throat, stared once at each of the six captives. They sat in a loose semicircle across from him, tightly restrained with spice-fiber ropes which held their legs crossed, their hands behind them. The bindings terminated in a tight noose at each man's throat. Their stillsuits had been cut away at the neck.
    The bound men stared back at Muriz without flinching. Two of them wore loose off-world garments which marked them as wealthy residents of an Arrakeen city. These two had skin which was smoother, lighter than that of their companions, whose sere features and bony frames marked them as desert-born.
    Muriz resembled the desert dwellers, but his eyes were more deeply sunken, whiteless pits which not even the glow of the spicelamp touched. His son appeared an unformed copy of the man, with a flatness of face which did not quite hide the turmoil boiling within him.
    "Among the Cast Out we have a special test for manhood," Muriz said. "One day my son will be a judge in Shuloch. We must know that he can act as he must. Our judges cannot forget Jacurutu and our day of despair. Kralizec, the Typhoon Struggle, lives in our hearts." It was all spoken with the flat intonation of ritual.
    One of the soft-featured city dwellers across from Muriz stirred, said: "You do wrong to threaten us and bind us captive. We came peacefully on umma."
    Muriz nodded. "You came in search of a personal religious awakening? Good. You shall have that awakening." 
    The soft-featured man said: "If we --"
    Beside him a darker desert Fremen snapped: "Be silent, fool! These are the water stealers. These are the ones we thought we'd wiped out." 
    "That old story," the soft-featured captive said.
    "Jacurutu is more than a story," Muriz said. Once more he gestured to his son. "I have presented Assan Tariq. I am arifa in this place, your only judge. My son, too, will be trained to detect demons. The old ways are best."
    "That's why we came into the deep desert," the soft-featured man protested. "We chose the old way, wandering in --" 
    "With paid guides," Muriz said, gesturing to the darker captives. "You would buy your way into heaven?" Muriz glanced up at his son. "Assan, are you prepared?"
    "I have reflected long upon that night when men came and murdered our people," Assan said. His voice projected an uneasy straining. "They owe us water."
    "Your father gives you six of them," Muriz said. "Their water is ours. Their shades are yours, your guardians forevermore. Their shades will warn you of demons. They will be your slaves when you cross over into the alam al-mythal. What do you say, my son?"
    "I thank my father," Assan said. He took a short step forward. "I accept manhood among the Cast Out. This water is our water."
    As he finished speaking, the youth crossed to the captives. Starting on the left, he gripped the man's hair and drove the crysknife up under the chin into the brain. It was skillfully done to spill the minimum blood. Only the one soft-featured city Fremen protested, squalling as the youth grabbed his hair. The others spat at Assan Tariq in the old way, saying by this: "See how little I value my water when it is taken by animals!"
    When it was done, Muriz clapped his hands once. Attendants came and began removing the bodies, taking them to the deathstill where they could be rendered for their water.
    Muriz arose, looked at his son who stood breathing deeply, watching the attendants remove the bodies. "Now you are a man," Muriz said. "The water of our enemies will feed slaves. And, my son . . ."
    Assan Tariq turned an alert and pouncing look upon his father. The youth's lips were drawn back in a tight smile. 
    "The Preacher must not know of this," Muriz said. 
    "I understand, father."
    "You did it well," Muriz said. "Those who stumble upon Shuloch must not survive." 
    "As you say, father."
    "You are trusted with important duties," Muriz said. "I am proud of you."

= = = = = =

A sophisticated human can become primitive. What this really means is that the human's way of life changes. Old values change, become linked to the landscape with its plants and animals. This new existence requires a working knowledge of those multiplex and cross-linked events usually referred to as nature. It requires a measure of respect for the inertial power within such natural systems. When a human gains this working knowledge and respect, that is called "being primitive." The converse, of course, is equally true: the primitive can become sophisticated, but not without accepting dreadful psychological damage.
-The Leto Commentary, After Harq al-Ada

    "How can we be sure?" Ghanima asked. "This is very dangerous." 
    "We've tested it before," Leto argued. 
    "It may not be the same this time. What if --" 
    "It's the only way open to us," Leto said. "You agree we can't go the way of the spice."
    Ghanima sighed. She did not like this thrust and parry of words, but knew the necessity which pressed her brother. She also knew the fearful source of her own reluctance. They had but to look at Alia and know the perils of that inner world. 
    "Well?" Leto asked. 
    Again she sighed.
    They sat cross-legged in one of their private places, a narrow opening from the cave to the cliff where often their mother and father had watched the sun set over the bled. It was two hours past the evening meal, a time when the twins were expected to exercise their bodies and their minds. They had chosen to flex their minds. 
    "I will try it alone if you refuse to help," Leto said.
    Ghanima looked away from him toward the black hangings of the moisture seals which guarded this opening in the rock. Leto continued to stare out over the desert.
    They had been speaking for some time in a language so ancient that even its name remained unknown in these times. The language gave their thoughts a privacy which no other human could penetrate. Even Alia, who avoided the intricacies of her inner world, lacked the mental linkages which would allow her to grasp any more than an occasional word.
    Leto inhaled deeply, taking in the distinctive furry odor of a Fremen cavern-sietch which persisted in this windless alcove. The murmurous hubbub of the sietch and its damp heat were absent here, and both felt this as a relief.
    "I agree we need guidance," Ghanima said. "But if we --" 
    "Ghani! We need more than guidance. We need protection." 
    "Perhaps there is no protection." She looked directly at her brother, met that gaze in his eyes like the waiting watchfulness of a predator. His eyes belied the placidity of his features.
    "We must escape possession," Leto said. He used the special infinitive of the ancient language, a form strictly neutral in voice and tense but profoundly active in its implications. 
    Ghanima correctly interpreted his argument.
    "Mohw'pwium d'mi hish pash moh'm ka," she intoned. The capture of my soul is the capture of a thousand souls. 
    "Much more than that," he countered.
    "Knowing the dangers, you persist." She made it a statement, not a question.
    "Wabun 'k wabunat!" he said. Rising, thou risest!
    He felt his choice as an obvious necessity. Doing this thing, it were best done actively. They must wind the past into the present and allow it to unreel into their future.
    "Muriyat," she conceded, her voice low. It must be done lovingly.
    "Of course." He waved a hand to encompass total acceptance. "Then we will consult as our parents did."
    Ghanima remained silent, tried to swallow past a lump in her throat. Instinctively she glanced south toward the great open erg which was showing a dim grey pattern of dunes in the last of the day's light. In that direction her father had gone on his last walk into the desert.
    Leto stared downward over the cliff edge at the green of the sietch oasis. All was dusk down there, but he knew its shapes and colors: blossoms of copper, gold, red, yellow, rust, and russet spread right out to the rock markers which outlined the extent of the qanat-watered plantings. Beyond the rock markers stretched a stinking band of dead Arrakeen life, killed by foreign plants and too much water, now forming a barrier against the desert.
    Presently Ghanima said: "I am ready. Let us begin." 
    "Yes, damn all!" He reached out, touched her arm to soften the exclamation, said, "Please, Ghani . . . Sing that song. It makes this easier for me."
    Ghanima hitched herself closer to him, circled his waist with her left arm. She drew in two deep breaths, cleared her throat, and began singing in a clear piping voice the words her mother had so often sung for their father:

"Here I redeem the pledge thou gavest; 
I pour sweet water upon thee.
Life shall prevail in this windless place: 
My love, thou shalt live in a palace, 
Thy enemies shall fall to emptiness. 
We travel this path together 
Which love has traced for thee. 
Surely well do I show the way 
For my love is thy palace . . ."

    Her voice fell into the desert silence which even a whisper might despoil, and Leto felt himself sinking, sinking -- becoming the father whose memories spread like an overlayer in the genes of his immediate past.
    For this brief space, I must be Paul, he told himself. This is not Ghani beside me; it is my beloved Chani, whose wise counsel has saved us both many a time.
    For her part, Ghanima had slipped into the persona-memory of her mother with frightening ease, as she had known she would. How much easier this was for the female -- and how much more dangerous.
    In a voice turned suddenly husky, Ghanima said: "Look there, beloved!" First Moon had risen and, against its cold light, they saw an arc of orange fire falling upward into space. The transport which had brought the Lady Jessica, laden now with spice, was returning to its mother-cluster in orbit.
    The keenest of remembrances ran through Leto then, bringing memories like bright bell-sounds. For a flickering instant he was another Leto -- Jessica's Duke. Necessity pushed those memories aside, but not before he felt the piercing of the love and the pain. 
    I must be Paul, he reminded himself.
    The transformation came over him with a frightening duality, as though Leto were a dark screen against which his father was projected. He felt both his own flesh and his father's, and the flickering differences threatened to overcome him. 
    "Help me, father," he whispered.
    The flickering disturbance passed and now there was another imprint upon his awareness, while his own identity as Leto stood at one side as an observer.
    "My last vision has not yet come to pass," he said, and the voice was Paul's. He turned to Ghanima. "You know what I saw." 
    She touched his cheek with her right hand. "Did you walk into the desert to die, beloved? Is that what you did?" 
    "It may be that I did, but that vision . . . Would that not be reason enough to stay alive?" 
    "But blind?" she asked. 
    "Even so." 
    "Where could you go?" 
    He took a deep, shuddering breath. "Jacurutu." 
    "Beloved!" Tears began flowing down her cheeks.
    "Muad'Dib, the hero, must be destroyed utterly," he said. "Otherwise this child cannot bring us back from chaos." 
    "The Golden Path," she said. "It is not a good vision." 
    "It's the only possible vision." 
    "Alia has failed, then . . ." 
    "Utterly. You see the record of it."
    "Your mother has returned too late." She nodded, and it was Chani's wise expression on the childish face of Ghanima. "Could there not be another vision? Perhaps if --"
    "No, beloved. Not yet. This child cannot peer into the future yet and return safely."
    Again a shuddering breath disturbed his body, and Leto-observer felt the deep longing of his father to live once more in vital flesh, to make living decisions and . . . How desperate the need to unmake past mistakes!
    "Father!" Leto called, and it was as though he shouted echoingly within his own skull.
    It was a profound act of will which Leto felt then: the slow, clinging withdrawal of his father's internal presence, the release of senses and muscles.
    "Beloved," Chani's voice whispered beside him, and the withdrawal slowed. "What is happening?"
    "Don't go yet," Leto said, and it was his own voice, rasping and uncertain, still his own. Then: "Chani, you must tell us: How do we avoid . . . what has happened to Alia?"
    It was Paul-within who answered him, though, with words which fell upon his inner ear, halting and with long pauses: "There is no certainty. You . . . saw . . . what almost . . . happened . . . with . . . me." 
    "But Alia . . ." 
    "The damned Baron has her!" 
    Leto felt his throat burning with dryness. "Is he . . . have I . . ."
    "He's in you . . . but . . . I . . . we cannot . . . sometime we sense . . . each other, but you . . ."
    "Can you not read my thoughts?" Leto asked. "Would you know then if . . . he . . ."
    "Sometimes I can feel your thoughts . . . but I . . . we live only through . . . the . . . reflection of . . . your awareness. Your memory creates us. The danger . . . it is a precise memory. And . . . those of us . . . those of us who loved power . . . and gathered it at . . . any price . . . those can be . . . more precise." 
    "Stronger?" Leto whispered. 
    "Stronger."
    "I know your vision," Leto said. "Rather than let him have me, I'll become you." 
    "Not that!"
    Leto nodded to himself, sensing the enormous will-force his father had required to withdraw, recognizing the consequences of failure. Any possession reduced the possessed to Abomination. The recognition gave him a renewed sense of strength, and he felt his own body with abnormal acuteness and a deeply drawn awareness of past mistakes: his own and those of his ancestors. It was the uncertainties which weakened -- he saw this now. For an instant, temptation warred with fear within him. This flesh possessed the ability to transform melange into a vision of the future. With the spice, he could breathe the future, shatter Time's veils. He found the temptation difficult to shed, clasped his hands and sank into the prana-bindu awareness. His flesh negated the temptation. His flesh wore the deep knowledge learned in blood by Paul. Those who sought the future hoped to gain the winning gamble on tomorrow's race. Instead they found themselves trapped into a lifetime whose every heartbeat and anguished wail was known. Paul's final vision had shown the precarious way out of that trap, and Leto knew now that he had no other choice but to follow that way.
    "The joy of living, its beauty is all bound up in the fact that life can surprise you," he said.
    A soft voice whispered in his ear: "I've always known that beauty."
    Leto turned his head, stared into Ghanima's eyes which glistened in the bright moonlight. He saw Chani looking back at him. "Mother," he said, "you must withdraw." 
    "Ahhh, the temptation!" she said, and kissed him.
    He pushed her away. "Would you take your daughter's life?" he demanded.
    "It's so easy . . . so foolishly easy," she said.
    Leto, feeling panic begin to grip him, remembered what an effort of will his father's persona-within had required to abandon the flesh. Was Ghanima lost in that observer-world where he had watched and listened, learning what he had required from his father?
    "I will despise you, mother," he said.
    "Others won't despise me," she said. "Be my beloved."
    "If I do . . . you know what you both will become," he said. "My father will despise you." 
    "Never!" 
    "I will!"
    The sound was jerked out of his throat without his volition and it carried all the old overtones of Voice which Paul had learned from his witch mother.
    "Don't say it," she moaned. 
    "I will despise you!" 
    "Please . . . please don't say it."
    Leto rubbed his throat, feeling the muscles become once more his own. "He will despise you. He will turn his back on you. He will go into the desert again." 
    "No . . . no . . ." 
    She shook her head from side to side. 
    "You must leave, mother," he said.
    "No . . . no . . ." But the voice lacked its original force.
    Leto watched his sister's face. How the muscles twitched! Emotions fled across the flesh at the turmoil within her. 
    "Leave," he whispered "Leave." 
    "No-o-o-o . . ."
    He gripped her arm, felt the tremors which pulsed through her muscles, the nerves twitching. She writhed, tried to pull away, but he held tightly to her arm, whispering: "Leave . . . leave . . ." 
    And all the time, Leto berated himself for talking Ghani into this parent game which once they'd played often, but she had lately resisted. It was true that the female had more weakness in that inner assault, he realized. There lay the origin of the Bene Gesserit fear.
    Hours passed and still Ghanima's body trembled and twitched with the inner battle, but now his sister's voice joined the argument. He heard her talking to that image within, the pleading.
    "Mother . . . please --" And once: "You've seen Alia! Will you become another Alia?"
    At last Ghanima leaned against him, whispered: "She has accepted it. She's gone."
    He stroked her head. "Ghani, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'll never ask you to do that again. I was selfish. Forgive me." 
    "There's nothing to forgive," she said, and her voice came panting as though after great physical exertion. "We've learned much that we needed to know."
    "She spoke to you of many things," he said. "We'll share it later when --" 
    "No! We'll do it now. You were right." 
    "My Golden Path?" 
    "Your damned Golden Path!"
    "Logic's useless unless it's armed with essential data," he said. "But I --"
    "Grandmother came back to guide our education and to see if we'd been . . . contaminated." 
    "That's what Duncan says. There's nothing new in --" 
    "Prime computation," she agreed, her voice strengthening. She pulled away from him, looked out at the desert which lay in a predawn hush. This battle . . . this knowledge, had cost them a night. The Royal Guard beyond the moisture seal must have had much to explain. Leto had charged that nothing disturb them.
    "People often learn subtlety as they age," Leto said. "What is it we're learning with all of this agedness to draw upon?" 
    "The universe as we see it is never quite the exact physical universe," she said. "We mustn't perceive this grandmother just as a grandmother."
    "That'd be dangerous," he agreed. "But my ques --" 
    "There's something beyond subtlety," she said. "We must have a place in our awareness to perceive what we can't preconceive. That's why . . . my mother spoke to me often of Jessica. At the last, when we were both reconciled to the inner exchange, she said many things." Ghanima sighed.
    "We know she's our grandmother," he said. "You were with her for hours yesterday. Is that why --"
    "If we allow it, our knowing will determine how we react to her," Ghanima said. "That's what my mother kept warning me. She quoted our grandmother once and --" Ghanima touched his arm. "-- I heard the echo of it within me in our grandmother's voice."
    "Warning you," Leto said. He found this thought disturbing. Was nothing in this world dependable?
    "Most deadly errors arise from obsolete assumptions," Ghanima said. "That's what my mother kept quoting." 
    "That's pure Bene Gesserit."
    "If . . . if Jessica has gone back to the Sisterhood completely . . ."
    "That'd be very dangerous to us," he said, completing the thought. "We carry the blood of their Kwisatz Haderach -- their male Bene Gesserit."
    "They won't abandon that search," she said, "but they may abandon us. Our grandmother could be the instrument." 
    "There's another way," he said.
    "Yes -- the two of us . . . mated. But they know what recessives might complicate that pairing." 
    "It's a gamble they must've discussed." 
    "And with our grandmother, at that. I don't like that way." 
    "Nor I." 
    "Still, it's not the first time a royal line has tried to . . ." 
    "It repels me," he said, shuddering. 
    She felt the movement, fell silent. 
    "Power," he said.
    And in that strange alchemy of their similarities she knew where his thoughts had been. "The power of the Kwisatz Haderach must fail," she agreed.
    "Used in their way," he said.
    In that instant, day came to the desert beyond their vantage point. They sensed the heat beginning. Colors leaped forth from the plantings beneath the cliff. Grey-green leaves sent spiked shadows along the ground. The low morning light of Dune's silvery sun revealed the verdant oasis full of golden and purple shadows in the well of the sheltering cliffs. 
    Leto stood, stretched.
    "The Golden Path, then," Ghanima said, and she spoke as much to herself as to him, knowing how their father's last vision met and melted into Leto's dreams.
    Something brushed against the moisture seals behind them and voices could be heard murmuring there.
    Leto reverted to the ancient language they used for privacy: "L'ii ani howr samis sm'kwi owr samit sut."
    That was where the decision lodged itself in their awareness. Literally: We will accompany each other into deathliness, though only one may return to report it.
    Ghanima stood then and, together, they returned through the moisture seals to the sietch, where the guards roused themselves and fell in behind as the twins headed toward their own quarters. The throngs parted before them with a difference on this morning, exchanging glances with the guards. Spending the night alone above the desert was an old Fremen custom for the holy sages. All the Uma had practiced this form of vigil. Paul Muad'Dib had done it . . . and Alia. Now the royal twins had begun. 
    Leto noted the difference, mentioned it to Ghanima.
    "They don't know what we've decided for them," she said. "They don't really know."
    Still in the private language, he said: "It requires the most fortuitous beginning."
    Ghanima hesitated a moment to form her thoughts. Then: "In that time, mourning for the sibling, it must be exactly real -- even to the making of the tomb. The heart must follow the sleep lest there be no awakening."
    In the ancient tongue it was an extremely convoluted statement, employing a pronominal object separated from the infinitive. It was a syntax which allowed each set of internal phrases to turn upon itself, becoming several different meanings, all definite and quite distinct but subtly interrelated. In part, what she had said was that they risked death with Leto's plan and, real or simulated, it made no difference. The resultant change would be like death, literally: "funeral murder." And there was an added meaning to the whole which pointed accusatively at whoever survived to report, that is: act out the living part. Any misstep there would negate the entire plan, and Leto's Golden Path would become a dead end.
    "Extremely delicate," Leto agreed. He parted the hangings for them as they entered their own anteroom.
    Activity among their attendants paused only for a heartbeat as the twins crossed to the arched passage which led into the quarters assigned to the Lady Jessica.
    "You are not Osiris." Ghanima reminded him.
    "Nor will I try to be."
    Ghanima took his arm to stop him. "Alia darsatay haunus m'smow," she warned.
    Leto stared into his sister's eyes. Indeed, Alia's actions did give off a foul smell which their grandmother must have noted. He smiled appreciatively at Ghanima. She had mixed the ancient tongue with Fremen superstition to call up a most basic tribal omen. M'smow, the foul odor of a summer night, was the harbinger of death at the hands of demons. And Isis had been the demon-goddess of death to the people whose tongue they now spoke.
    "We Atreides have a reputation for audacity to maintain," he said.
    "So we'll take what we need," she said.
    "It's that or become petitioners before our own Regency," he said. "Alia would enjoy that." 
    "But our plan . . ." She let it trail off.
    Our plan, he thought. She shared it completely now. He said: "I think of our plan as the toil of the shaduf."
    Ghanima glanced back at the anteroom through which they'd passed, smelling the furry odors of morning with their sense of eternal beginning. She liked the way Leto had employed their private language. Toil of the shaduf. It was a pledge. He'd called their plan agricultural work of a very menial kind: fertilizing, irrigating, weeding, transplanting, pruning -- yet with the Fremen implication that this labor occurred simultaneously in Another World where it symbolized cultivating the richness of the soul.
    Ghanima studied her brother as they hesitated here in the rock passage. It had grown increasingly obvious to her that he was pleading on two levels: one, for the Golden Path of his vision and their father's, and two, that she allow him free reign to carry out the extremely dangerous myth-creation which the plan generated. This frightened her. Was there more to his private vision that he had not shared? Could he see himself as the potentially deified figure to lead humankind into a rebirth -- like father, like son? The cult of Muad'Dib had turned sour, fermenting in Alia's mismanagement and the unbridled license of a military priesthood which rode the Fremen power. Leto wanted regeneration.
    He's hiding something from me, she realized.
    She reviewed what he had told her of his dream. It held such iridescent reality that he might walk around for hours afterward in a daze. The dream never varied, he said.
    "I am on sand in bright yellow daylight, yet there is no sun. Then I realize that I am the sun. My light shines out as a Golden Path. When I realize this, I move out of myself. I turn, expecting to see myself as the sun. But I am not the sun; I am a stick figure, a child's drawing with zigzag lightning lines for eyes, stick legs and stick arms. There is a scepter in my left hand, and it's a real scepter -- much more detailed in its reality than the stick figure which holds it. The scepter moves, and this terrifies me. As it moves, I feel myself awaken, yet I know I'm still dreaming. I realize then that my skin is encased in something -- an armor which moves as my skin moves. I cannot see this armor, but I feel it. My terror leaves me then, for this armor gives me the strength of ten thousand men."
    As Ghanima stared at him, Leto tried to pull away, to continue their course toward Jessica's quarters. Ghanima resisted.
    "This Golden Path could be no better than any other path," she said.
    Leto looked at the rock floor between them, feeling the strong return of Ghanima's doubts. "I must do it," he said.
    "Alia is possessed," she said. "That could happen to us. It could already have happened and we might not know it." 
    "No." He shook his head, met her gaze. "Alia resisted. That gave the powers within her their strength. By her own strength she was overcome. We've dared to search within, to seek out the old languages and the old knowledge. We're already amalgams of those lives within us. We don't resist; we ride with them. This was what I learned from our father last night. It's what I had to learn." 
    "He said nothing of that within me." 
    "You listened to our mother. It's what we --" 
    "And I almost lost." 
    "Is she still strong within you?" Fear tightened his face.
    "Yes . . . but now I think she guards me with her love. You were very good when you argued with her." And Ghanima thought about the reflected mother-within, said: "Our mother exists now for me in the alam al-mythal with the others, but she has tasted the fruit of hell. Now I can listen to her without fear. As to the others . . ."
    "Yes," he said. "And I listened to my father, but I think I'm really following the counsel of the grandfather for whom I was named. Perhaps the name makes it easy."
    "Are you counseled to speak to our grandmother of the Golden Path?"
    Leto waited while an attendant pressed past them with a basket-tray carrying the Lady Jessica's breakfast. A strong smell of spice filled the air as the attendant passed.
    "She lives in us and in her own flesh," Leto said. "Her counsel can be consulted twice."
    "Not by me," Ghanima protested. "I'm not risking that again." 
    "Then by me."
    "I thought we agreed that she's gone back to the Sisterhood." 
    "Indeed. Bene Gesserit at her beginning, her own creature in the middle, and Bene Gesserit at the end. But remember that she, too, carries Harkonnen blood and is closer to it than we are, that she has experienced a form of this inner sharing which we have." 
    "A very shallow form," Ghanima said. "And you haven't answered my question." 
    "I don't think I'll mention the Golden Path." 
    "I may." 
    "Ghani!"
    "We don't need any more Atreides gods! We need a space for some humanity!" 
    "Have I ever denied it?"
    "No." She took a deep breath and looked away from him. Attendants peered in at them from the anteroom, hearing the argument by its tone but unable to understand the ancient words.
    "We have to do it," he said. "If we fail to act, we might just as well fall upon our knives." He used the Fremen form which carried the meaning of "spill our water into the tribal cistern." 
    Once more Ghanima looked at him. She was forced to agree. But she felt trapped within a construction of many walls. They both knew a day of reckoning lay across their path no matter what they did. Ghanima knew this with a certainty reinforced by the data garnered from those other memory-lives, but now she feared the strength which she gave those other psyches by using the data of their experiences. They lurked like harpies within her, shadow demons waiting in ambush.
    Except for her mother, who had held the fleshly power and had renounced it. Ghanima still felt shaken by that inner struggle, knowing she would have lost but for Leto's persuasiveness.
    Leto said his Golden Path led out of this trap. Except for the nagging realization that he withheld something from his vision, she could only accept his sincerity. He needed her fertile creativity to enrich the plan.
    "We'll be tested," he said, knowing where her doubts led.
    "Not in the spice."
    "Perhaps even there. Surely, in the desert and in the Trial of Possession."
    "You never mentioned the Trial of Possession!" she accused. "Is that part of your dream?"
    He tried to swallow in a dry throat, cursed this betrayal "Yes." 
    "Then we will be . . . possessed?" 
    "No."
    She thought about the Trial -- that ancient Fremen examination whose ending most often brought hideous death. Then this plan had other complexities. It would take them onto an edge where a plunge to either side might not be countenanced by the human mind and that mind remain sane.
    Knowing where her thoughts meandered, Leto said: "Power attracts the psychotics. Always. That's what we have to avoid within ourselves." 
    "You're sure we won't be . . . possessed?" 
    "Not if we create the Golden Path." 
    Still doubtful, she said: "I'll not bear your children, Leto." 
    He shook his head, suppressing the inner betrayals, lapsed into the royal-formal form of the ancient tongue: "Sister mine, I love you more dearly than myself, but that is not the tender of my desires."
    "Very well, then let us return to another argument before we join our grandmother. A knife slipped into Alia might settle most of our problems."
    "If you believe that, you believe we can walk in mud and leave no tracks," he said. "Besides, when has Alia ever given anyone an opportunity?" 
    "There is talk about this Javid." 
    "Does Duncan show any signs of growing horns?" 
    Ghanima shrugged. "One poison, two poison." It was the common label applied to the royal habit of cataloguing companions by their threat to your person, a mark of rulers everywhere. 
    "We must do it my way," he said. 
    "The other way might be cleaner."
    By her reply, he knew she had finally suppressed her doubts and come around to agreement with his plan. The realization brought him no happiness. He found himself looking at his own hands, wondering if the dirt would cling.

= = = = = =

This was Muad'Dib's achievement: He saw the subliminal reservoir of each individual as an unconscious bank of memories going back to the primal cell of our common genesis. Each of us, he said, can measure out his distance from that common origin. Seeing this and telling of it, he made the audacious leap of decision. Muad'Dib set himself the task of integrating genetic memory into ongoing evaluation. Thus did he break through Time's veils, making a single thing of the future and the past. That was Muad'Dib's creation embodied in his son and his daughter.
-Testament of Arrakis by Harq al-Ada

    Farad'n strode through the garden compound of his grandfather's royal palace, watching his shadow grow shorter as the sun of Salusa Secundus climbed toward noon. He had to stretch himself a bit to keep step with the tall Bashar who accompanied him.
    "I have doubts, Tyekanik," he said. "Oh, there's no denying the attractions of a throne, but --" He drew in a deep breath. "-- I have so many interests."
    Tyekanik, fresh from a savage argument with Farad'n's mother, glanced sidelong at the Prince, noting how the lad's flesh was firming as he approached his eighteenth birthday. There was less and less of Wensicia in him with each passing day and more and more of old Shaddam, who had preferred his private pursuits to the responsibilities of royalty. That was what had cost him the throne in the end, of course. He'd grown soft in the ways of command.
    "You have to make a choice," Tyekanik said. "Oh, doubtless there'll be time for some of your interests, but . . ." 
    Farad'n chewed his lower lip. Duty held him here, but he felt frustrated. He would far rather have gone to the rock enclave where the sandtrout experiments were being conducted. Now there was a project with enormous potential: wrest the spice monopoly from the Atreides and anything might happen.
    "You're sure these twins will be . . . eliminated?"
    "Nothing absolutely certain, My Prince, but the prospects are good."
    Farad'n shrugged. Assassination remained a fact of royal life. The language was filled with the subtle permutations of ways to eliminate important personages. By a single word, one could distinguish between poison in drink or poison in food. He presumed the elimination of the Atreides twins would be accomplished by a poison. It was not a pleasant thought. By all accounts the twins were a most interesting pair.
    "Would we have to move to Arrakis?" Farad'n asked.
    "It's the best choice, put us at the point of greatest pressure." Farad'n appeared to be avoiding some question and Tyekanik wondered what it might be.
    "I'm troubled, Tyekanik," Farad'n said, speaking as they rounded a hedge corner and approached a fountain surrounded by giant black roses. Gardeners could be heard snipping beyond the hedges.
    "Yes?" Tyekanik prompted.
    "This, ah, religion which you've professed . . ." 
    "Nothing strange about that, My Prince," Tyekanik said and hoped his voice remained firm. "This religion speaks to the warrior in me. It's a fitting religion for a Sardaukar." That, at least, was true.
    "Yesss . . . But my mother seems so pleased by it." Damn Wensicia! he thought. She's made her son suspicious.
    "I care not what your mother thinks," Tyekanik said. "A man's religion is his own affair. Perhaps she sees something in this that may help to put you on the throne." 
    "That was my thought," Farad'n said.
    Ahhh, this is a sharp lad! Tyekanik thought. He said: "Look into the religion for yourself; you'll see at once why I chose it." 
    "Still . . . Muad'Dib's preachings? He was an Atreides, after all."
    "I can only say that the ways of God are mysterious," Tyekanik said.
    "I see. Tell me, Tyek, why'd you ask me to walk with you just now? It's almost noon and usually you're off to someplace or other at my mother's command this time of day."
    Tyekanik stopped at a stone bench which looked upon the fountain and the giant roses beyond. The splashing water soothed him and he kept his attention upon it as he spoke. "My Prince, I've done something which your mother may not like." And he thought: If he believes that, her damnable scheme will work. Tyekanik almost hoped Wensicia's scheme would fail. Bringing that damnable Preacher here. She was insane. And the cost!
    As Tyekanik remained silent, waiting, Farad'n asked: "All right, Tyek, what've you done?" 
    "I've brought a practitioner of oneiromancy," Tyekanik said.
    Farad'n shot a sharp glance at his companion. Some of the older Sardaukar played the dream-interpretation game, had done so increasingly since their defeat by that "Supreme Dreamer," Muad'Dib. Somewhere within their dreams, they reasoned, might lay a way back to power and glory. But Tyekanik had always eschewed this play.
    "This doesn't sound like you, Tyek," Farad'n said.
    "Then I can only speak from my new religion," he said, addressing the fountain. To speak of religion was, of course, why they'd risked bringing The Preacher here. 
    "Then speak from this religion," Farad'n said.
    "As My Prince commands." He turned, looked at this youthful holder of all the dreams which now were distilled into the path which House Corrino would follow. "Church and state. My Prince, even scientific reason and faith, and even more: progress and tradition -- all of these are reconciled in the teachings of Muad'Dib. He taught that there are no intransigent opposites except in the beliefs of men and, sometimes, in their dreams. One discovers the future in the past, and both are part of a whole."
    In spite of doubts which he could not dispel, Farad'n found himself impressed by these words. He heard a note of reluctant sincerity in Tyekanik's voice, as though the man spoke against inner compulsions.
    "And that's why you bring me this . . . this interpreter of dreams?"
    "Yes, My Prince. Perhaps your dream penetrates Time. You win back your consciousness of your inner being when you recognize the universe as a coherent whole. Your dreams . . . well . . ." 
    "But I spoke idly of my dreams," Farad'n protested. "They are a curiosity, no more. I never once suspected that you . . ." 
    "My Prince, nothing you do can be unimportant." 
    "That's very flattering, Tyek. Do you really believe this fellow can see into the heart of great mysteries?" 
    "I do, My Prince." 
    "Then let my mother be displeased."
    "You will see him?"
    "Of course -- since you've brought him to displease my mother."
    Does he mock me? Tyekanik wondered. And he said: "I must warn you that the old man wears a mask. It is an Ixian device which enables the sightless to see with their skin." 
    "He is blind?" 
    "Yes, My Prince." 
    "Does he know who I am?" 
    "I told him, My Prince." 
    "Very well. Let us go to him."
    "If My Prince will wait a moment here, I will bring the man to him."
    Farad'n looked around the fountain garden, smiled. As good a place as any for this foolishness. "Have you told him what I dreamed?"
    "Only in general terms, My Prince. He will ask you for a personal accounting." 
    "Oh, very well. I'll wait here. Bring the fellow." 
    Farad'n turned his back, heard Tyekanik retire in haste. A gardener could be seen working just beyond the hedge, the top of a brown-capped head, the flashing of shears poking above the greenery. The movement was hypnotic.
    This dream business is nonsense, Farad'n thought. It was wrong of Tyek to do this without consulting me. Strange that Tyek should get religion at his age. And now it's dreams.
    Presently he heard footsteps behind him. Tyekanik's familiar positive stride and a more dragging gait. Farad'n turned, stared at the approaching dream interpreter. The Ixian mask was a black, gauzy affair which concealed the face from the forehead to below the chin. There were no eye slits in the mask. If one were to believe the Ixian boasts, the entire mask was a single eye.
    Tyekanik stopped two paces from Farad'n, but the masked old man approached to less than a pace.
    "The interpreter of dreams," Tyekanik said. 
    Farad'n nodded.
    The masked old man coughed in a remote grunting fashion, as though trying to bring something up from his stomach.
    Farad'n was acutely conscious of a sour spice smell from the old man. It emanated from the long grey robe which covered his body.
    "Is that mask truly a part of your flesh?" Farad'n asked, realizing he was trying to delay the subject of dreams.
    "While I wear it," the old man said, and his voice carried a bitter twang and just a suggestion of Fremen accent. "Your dream," he said. "Tell me."
    Farad'n shrugged. Why not? That was why Tyek had brought the old man. Or was it? Doubts gripped Farad'n and he asked: "Are you truly a practitioner of oneiromancy?" 
    "I have come to interpret your dream, Puissant Lord." 
    Again Farad'n shrugged. This masked figure made him nervous and he glanced at Tyekanik, who remained where he had stopped, arms folded, staring at the fountain. 
    "Your dream, then," the old man pressed.
    Farad'n inhaled deeply, began to relate the dream. It became easier to talk as he got fully into it. He told about the water flowing upward in the well, about the worlds which were atoms dancing in his head, about the snake which transformed itself into a sandworm and exploded in a cloud of dust. Telling about the snake, he was surprised to discover, required more effort. A terrible reluctance inhibited him and this made him angry as he spoke.
    The old man remained impassive as Farad'n at last fell silent. The black gauze mask moved slightly to his breathing. Farad'n waited. The silence continued.
    Presently Farad'n asked: "Aren't you going to interpret my dream?"
    "I have interpreted it," he said, his voice seeming to come from a long distance.
    "Well?" Farad'n heard his own voice squeaking, telling him the tension his dream had produced.
    Still the old man remained impassively silent. 
    "Tell me, then!" The anger was obvious in his tone.
    "I said I'd interpret," the old man said. "I did not agree to tell you my interpretation."
    Even Tyekanik was moved by this, dropping his arms into balled fists at his sides. "What?" he grated.
    "I did not say I'd reveal my interpretation," the old man said. 
    "You wish more pay?" Farad'n asked.
    "I did not ask pay when I was brought here." A certain cold pride in the response softened Farad'n's anger. This was a brave old man, at any rate. He must know death could follow disobedience.
    "Allow me, My Prince," Tyekanik said as Farad'n started to speak. Then: "Will you tell us why you won't reveal your interpretation?"
    "Yes, My Lords. The dream tells me there would be no purpose in explaining these things."
    Farad'n could not contain himself. "Are you saying I already know the meaning of my dream?" 
    "Perhaps you do, My Lord, but that is not my gist." 
    Tyekanik moved up to stand beside Farad'n. Both glared at the old man. "Explain yourself," Tyekanik said. 
    "Indeed," Farad'n said.
    "If I were to speak of this dream, to explore these matters of water and dust, snakes and worms, to analyze the atoms which dance in your head as they do in mine -- ahh, Puissant Lord, my words would only confuse you and you would insist upon misunderstanding."
    "Do you fear that your words might anger me?" Farad'n demanded.
    "My Lord! You're already angry." 
    "Is it that you don't trust us?" Tyekanik asked.
    "That is very close to the mark, My Lord. I do not trust either of you and for the simple reason that you do not trust yourselves." 
    "You walk dangerously close to the edge," Tyekanik said. "Men have been killed for behavior less abusive than yours." 
    Farad'n nodded, said: "Don't tempt us to anger." 
    "The fatal consequences of Corrino anger are well known, My Lord of Salusa Secundus," the old man said.
    Tyekanik put a restraining hand on Farad'n's arm, asked: "Are you trying to goad us into killing you?"
    Farad'n had not thought of that, felt a chill now as he considered what such behavior might mean. Was this old man who called himself Preacher . . . was he more than he appeared? What might be the consequences of his death? Martyrs could be dangerous creations.
    "I doubt that you'll kill me no matter what I say," The Preacher said. "I think you know my value, Bashar, and your Prince now suspects it."
    "You absolutely refuse to interpret his dream?" Tyekanik asked.
    "I have interpreted it." 
    "And you will not reveal what you see in it?" 
    "Do you blame me, My Lord?" 
    "How can you be valuable to me?" Farad'n asked.
    The Preacher held out his right hand. "If I but beckon with this hand, Duncan Idaho will come to me and he will obey me."
    "What idle boast is this?" Farad'n asked.
    But Tyekanik shook his head, recalling his argument with Wensicia. He said: "My Prince, it could be true. This Preacher has many followers on Dune."
    "Why didn't you tell me he was from that place?" Farad'n asked.
    Before Tyekanik could answer. The Preacher addressed Farad'n: "My Lord, you must not feel guilty about Arrakis. You are but a product of your times. This is a special pleading which any man may make when his guilts assail him." 
    "Guilts!" Farad'n was outraged. 
    The Preacher only shrugged.
    Oddly, this shifted Farad'n from outrage to amusement. He laughed, throwing his head back, drawing a startled glance from Tyekanik. Then: "I like you,. Preacher." 
    "This gratifies me, Prince," the old man said.
    Suppressing a chuckle, Farad'n said: "We'll find you an apartment here in the palace. You will be my official interpreter of dreams -- even though you never give me a word of interpretation. And you can advise me about Dune, I have a great curiosity about that place." 
    "This I cannot do, Prince."
    An edge of his anger returned. Farad'n glared at the black mask. "And why not, pray tell?" 
    "My Prince," Tyekanik said, again touching Farad'n's arm. 
    "What is it, Tyek?"
    "We brought him here under bonded agreement with the Guild. He is to be returned to Dune." 
    "I am summoned back to Arrakis," The Preacher said. 
    "Who summons you?" Farad'n demanded. 
    "A power greater than thine, Prince."
    Farad'n shot a questioning glance at Tyekanik. "Is he an Atreides spy?" 
    "Not likely, My Prince. Alia has put a price on his head." 
    "If it's not the Atreides, then who summons you?" Farad'n asked, returning his attention to The Preacher. 
    "A power greater than the Atreides."
    A chuckle escaped Farad'n. This was only mystic nonsense. How could Tyek be fooled by such stuff? This Preacher had been summoned -- most likely by a dream. Of what importance were dreams?
    "This has been a waste of time, Tyek," Farad'n said. "Why did you subject me to this . . . this farce?"
    "There is a double price here, My Prince," Tyekanik said. "This interpreter of dreams promised me to deliver Duncan Idaho as an agent of House Corrino. All he asked was to meet you and interpret your dream." And Tyekanik added to himself: Or so he told Wensicia! New doubts assailed the Bashar.
    "Why is my dream so important to you, old man?" Farad'n asked.
    "Your dream tells me that great events move toward a logical conclusion," The Preacher said. "I must hasten my return." 
    Mocking, Farad'n said: "And you will remain inscrutable, giving me no advice."
    "Advice, Prince, is a dangerous commodity. But I will venture a few words which you may take as advice or in any other way which pleases you." 
    "By all means," Farad'n said.
    The Preacher held his masked face rigidly confronting Farad'n. "Governments may rise and fall for reasons which appear insignificant, Prince. What small events! An argument between two women . . . which way the wind blows on a certain day . . . a sneeze, a cough, the length of a garment or the chance collision of a fleck of sand and a courtier's eye. It is not always the majestic concerns of Imperial ministers which dictate the course of history, nor is it necessarily the pontifications of priests which move the hands of God."
    Farad'n found himself profoundly stirred by these words and could not explain his emotion.
    Tyekanik, however, had focused on one phrase. Why did this Preacher speak of a garment? Tyekanik's mind focused on the Imperial costumes dispatched to the Atreides twins, the tigers trained to attack. Was this old man voicing a subtle warning? How much did he know?
    "How is this advice?" Farad'n asked.
    "If you would succeed," The Preacher said, "you must reduce your strategy to its point of application. Where does one apply strategy? At a particular place and with a particular people in mind. But even with the greatest concern for minutiae, some small detail with no significance attached to it will escape you. Can your strategy, Prince, be reduced to the ambitions of a regional governor's wife?"
    His voice cold, Tyekanik interrupted: "Why do you harp upon strategy, Preacher? What is it you think My Prince will have?" 
    "He is being led to desire a throne," The Preacher said. "I wish him good luck, but he will need much more than luck." 
    "These are dangerous words," Farad'n said. "How is it you dare such words?"
    "Ambitions tend to remain undisturbed by realities," The Preacher said. "I dare such words because you stand at a crossroad. You could become admirable. But now you are surrounded by those who do not seek moral justifications, by advisers who are strategy oriented. You are young and strong and tough, but you lack a certain advanced training by which your character might evolve. This is sad because you have weaknesses whose dimensions I have described." 
    "What do you mean?" Tyekanik demanded.
    "Have a care when you speak," Farad'n said. "What is this weakness?"
    "You've given no thought to the kind of society you might prefer," The Preacher said. "You do not consider the hopes of your subjects. Even the form of the Imperium which you seek has little shape in your imaginings." He turned his masked face toward Tyekanik. "Your eye is upon the power, not upon its subtle uses and its perils. Your future is filled, thus, with manifest unknowns: with arguing women, with coughs and windy days. How can you create an epoch when you cannot see every detail? Your tough mind will not serve you. This is where you are weak."
    Farad'n studied the old man for a long space, wondering at the deeper issues implied by such thoughts, at the persistence of such discredited concepts. Morality! Social goals! These were myths to put beside belief in an upward movement of evolution.
    Tyekanik said: "We've had enough words. What of the price agreed upon, Preacher?"
    "Duncan Idaho is yours," The Preacher said. "Have a care how you use him. He is a jewel beyond price."
    "Oh, we've a suitable mission for him," Tyekanik said. He glanced at Farad'n. "By your leave, My Prince?" 
    "Send him packing before I change my mind," Farad'n said. Then, glaring at Tyekanik: "I don't like the way you've used me, Tyek!"
    "Forgive him, Prince," The Preacher said. "Your faithful Bashar does God's will without even knowing it." Bowing, The Preacher departed, and Tyekanik hurried to see him away.
    Farad'n watched the retreating backs, thought: I must look into this religion which Tyek espouses. And he smiled ruefully. What a dream interpreter! But what matter? My dream was not an important thing.

= = = = = =

And he saw a vision of armor. The armor was not his own skin; it was stronger than plasteel. Nothing penetrated his armor -- not knife or poison or sand, not the dust of the desert or its desiccating heat. In his right hand he carried the power to make the Coriolis storm, to shake the earth and erode it into nothing. His eyes were fixed upon the Golden Path and in his left hand he carried the scepter of absolute mastery. And beyond the Golden Path, his eyes looked into eternity which he knew to be the food of his soul and of his everlasting flesh.
-Heighia, My Brother's Dream from The Book of Ghanima

    "It'd be better for me never to become Emperor," Leto said. "Oh, I don't imply that I've made my father's mistake and peered into the future with a glass of spice. I say this thing out of selfishness. My sister and I desperately need a time of freedom when we can learn how to live with what we are."
    He fell silent, stared questioningly at the Lady Jessica. He'd spoken his piece as he and Ghanima had agreed. Now what would be their grandmother's response?
    Jessica studied her grandson in the low light of glowglobes which illuminated her quarters in Sietch Tabr. It was still early morning of her second day here and she'd already had disturbing reports that the twins had spent a night of vigil outside the sietch. What were they doing? She had not slept well and she felt fatigue acids demanding that she come down from the hyper-level which had sustained her through all the demanding necessities since that crucial performance at the spaceport. This was the sietch of her nightmares -- but outside, that was not the desert she remembered. Where have all the flowers come from? And the air around her felt too damp. Stillsuit discipline was lax among the young.
    "What are you, child, that you need time to learn about yourself?" she asked.
    He shook his head gently, knowing it to be a bizarre gesture of adulthood on a child's body, reminding himself that he must keep this woman off balance. "First, I am not a child. Oh . . ." He touched his chest. "This is a child's body; no doubt of that. But I am not a child."
    Jessica chewed her upper lip, disregarding what this betrayed. Her Duke, so many years dead on this accursed planet, had laughed at her when she did this. "Your one unbridled response," he'd called that chewing of the lip. "It tells me that you're disturbed, and I must kiss those lips to still their fluttering."
    Now this grandson who bore the name of her Duke shocked her into heart-pounding stillness merely by smiling and saying: "You are disturbed; I see it by the fluttering of those lips." 
    It required the most profound discipline of her Bene Gesserit training to restore a semblance of calm. She managed: "Do you taunt me?"
    "Taunt you? Never. But I must make it clear to you how much we differ. Let me remind you of that sietch orgy so long ago when the Old Reverend Mother gave you her lives and her memories. She tuned herself to you and gave you that . . . that long chain of sausages, each one a person. You have them yet. So you know something of what Ghanima and I experience." 
    "And Alia?" Jessica asked, testing him. 
    "Didn't you discuss that with Ghani?" 
    "I wish to discuss it with you."
    "Very well. Alia denied what she was and became that which she most feared. The past-within cannot be relegated to the unconscious. That is a dangerous course for any human, but for us who are pre-born, it is worse than death. And that is all I will say about Alia." 
    "So you're not a child," Jessica said.
    "I'm millions of years old. That requires adjustments which humans have never before been called upon to make." 
    Jessica nodded, calmer now, much more cautious than she'd been with Ghanima. And where was Ghanima? Why had Leto come here alone?
    "Well, grandmother," he said, "are we Abominations or are we the hope of the Atreides?" 
    Jessica ignored the question. "Where is your sister?" 
    "She distracts Alia to keep us from being disturbed. It is necessary. But Ghani would say nothing more to you than I've said. Didn't you observe that yesterday?"
    "What I observed yesterday is my affair. Why do you prattle about Abomination?"
    "Prattle? Don't give me your Bene Gesserit cant, grandmother. I'll feed it back to you, word for word, right out of your own memories. I want more than the fluttering of your lips." 
    Jessica shook her head, feeling the coldness of this . . . person who carried her blood. The resources at his disposal daunted her. She tried to match his tone, asked: "What do you know of my intentions?"
    He sniffed. "You needn't inquire whether I've made the mistake my father made. I've not looked outside our garden of time -- at least not by seeking it out. Leave absolute knowledge of the future to those moments of deja vu which any human may experience. I know the trap of prescience. My father's life tells me what I need to know about it. No, grandmother: to know the future absolutely is to be trapped into that future absolutely. It collapses time. Present becomes future. I require more freedom than that." 
    Jessica felt her tongue twitch with unspoken words. How could she respond to him with something he didn't already know? This was monstrous! He's me! He's my beloved Leto! This thought shocked her. Momentarily she wondered if the childish mask might not lapse into those dear features and resurrect . . . No!
    Leto lowered his head, looked upward to study her. Yes, she could be maneuvered after all. He said: "When you think of prescience, which I hope is rarely, you're probably no different from any other. Most people imagine how nice it would be to know tomorrow's quotation on the price of whale fur. Or whether a Harkonnen will once more govern their homeworld of Giedi Prime? But of course we know the Harkonnens without prescience, don't we, grandmother?"
    She refused to rise to his baiting. Of course he would know about the cursed Harkonnen blood in his ancestry.
    "Who is a Harkonnen?" he asked, goading. "Who is Beast Rabban? Any one of us, eh? But I digress. I speak the popular myth of prescience: to know the future absolutely! All of it! What fortunes could be made -- and lost -- on such absolute knowledge, eh? The rabble believes this. They believe that if a little bit is good, more must be better. How excellent! And if you handed one of them the complete scenario of his life, the unvarying dialogue up to his moment of death -- what a hellish gift that'd be. What utter boredom! Every living instant he'd be replaying what he knew absolutely. No deviation. He could anticipate every response, every utterance -- over and over and over and over and over and . . ." 
    Leto shook his head. "Ignorance has its advantages. A universe of surprises is what I pray for!"
    It was a long speech and, as she listened, Jessica marveled at how his mannerisms, his intonations, echoed his father -- her lost son. Even the ideas: these were things Paul might have said. 
    "You remind me of your father," she said. 
    "Is that hurtful to you?" 
    "In a way, but it's reassuring to know he lives on in you." 
    "How little you understand of how he lives on in me." 
    Jessica found his tone flat but dripping bitterness. She lifted her chin to look directly at him.
    "Or how your Duke lives in me," Leto said. "Grandmother, Ghanima is you! She's you to such an extent that your life holds not a single secret from her up to the instant you bore our father. And me! What a catalogue of fleshly recordings am I. There are moments when it is too much to bear. You come here to judge us? You come here to judge Alia? Better that we judge you!" 
    Jessica demanded answer of herself and found none. What was he doing? Why this emphasis on his difference? Did he court rejection? Had he reached Alia's condition -- Abomination? 
    "This disturbs you," he said.
    "It disturbs me." She permitted herself a futile shrug. "Yes, it disturbs me -- and for reasons you know full well. I'm sure you've reviewed my Bene Gesserit training. Ghanima admits it. I know Alia . . . did. You know the consequences of your difference." 
    He peered upward at her with disturbing intensity. "Almost, we did not take this tack with you," he said, and there was a sense of her own fatigue in his voice. "We know the fluttering of your lips as your lover knew them. Any bedchamber endearment your Duke whispered is ours to recall at will. You've accepted this intellectually, no doubt. But I warn you that intellectual acceptance is not enough. If any of us becomes Abomination -- it could be you within us who creates it! Or my father . . . or mother! Your Duke! Any one of you could possess us -- and the condition would be the same."
    Jessica felt a burning in her chest, dampness in her eyes. "Leto . . . " she managed, allowing herself to use his name at last. She found the pain less than she'd imagined it would be, forced herself to continue. "What is it you want of me?" 
    "I would teach my grandmother." 
    "Teach me what?"
    "Last night, Ghani and I played the mother-father roles almost to our destruction, but we learned much. There are things one can know, given an awareness of conditions. Actions can be predicted. Alia, now -- it's well nigh certainty that she's plotting to abduct you."
    Jessica blinked, shocked by the swift accusation. She knew this trick well, had employed it many times: set a person up along one line of reasoning, then introduce the shocker from another line. She recovered with a sharp intake of breath.
    "I know what Alia has been doing . . . what she is, but . . ." 
    "Grandmother, pity her. Use your heart as well as your intelligence. You've done that before. You pose a threat, and Alia wants the Imperium for her own -- at least, the thing she has become wants this." 
    "How do I know this isn't another Abomination speaking?" 
    He shrugged. "That's where your heart comes in. Ghani and I know how she fell. It isn't easy to adjust to the clamor of that inner multitude. Suppress their egos and they will come crowding back every time you invoke a memory. One day --" He swallowed in a dry throat. "-- a strong one from that inner pack decides it's time to share the flesh."
    "And there's nothing you can do?" She asked the question although she feared the answer.
    "We believe there is something . . . yes. We cannot succumb to the spice; that's paramount. And we must not suppress the past entirely. We must use it, make an amalgam of it. Finally we will mix them all into ourselves. We will, no longer be our original selves -- but we will not be possessed." 
    "You speak of a plot to abduct me."
    "It's obvious. Wensicia is ambitious for her son. Alia is ambitious for herself, and . . ." 
    "Alia and Farad'n?"
    "That's not indicated," he said. "But Alia and Wensicia run parallel courses right now. Wensicia has a sister in Alia's house. What simpler thing than a message to --" 
    "You know of such a message?" 
    "As though I'd seen it and read its every word." 
    "But you've not seen such a message?"
    "No need. I have only to know that the Atreides are all here together on Arrakis. All of the water in one cistern." He gestured to encompass the planet.
    "House Corrino wouldn't dare attack us here!" 
    "Alia would profit if they did." A sneer in his voice provoked her.
    "I won't be patronized by my own grandson!" she said.
    "Then dammit, woman, stop thinking of me as your grandson! Think of me as your Duke Leto!" Tone and facial expression, even the abrupt, hand gesture, were so exact that she fell silent in confusion.
    In a dry, remote voice, Leto said: "I tried to prepare you. Give me that, at least." 
    "Why would Alia abduct me?" 
    "To blame it on House Corrino, of course." 
    "I don't believe it. Even for her, this would be . . . monstrous! Too dangerous! How could she do it without . . . I cannot believe this!"
    "When it happens, you'll believe. Ahh, grandmother, Ghani and I have but to eavesdrop within ourselves and we know. It's simple self-preservation. How else can we even guess at the mistakes being made around us?"
    "I do not for a minute accept that abduction is part of Alia's --"
    "Gods below! How can you, a Bene Gesserit, be this dense? The whole Imperium suspects why you're here. Wensicia's propagandists are all prepared to discredit you. Alia can't wait for that to happen. If you go down, House Atreides could suffer a mortal blow." 
    "What does the whole Imperium suspect?"
    She measured out the words as coldly as possible, knowing she could not sway this unchild with any wile of Voice.
    "The Lady Jessica plans to breed those twins together!" he rasped. "That's what the Sisterhood wants. Incest!" 
    She blinked. "Idle rumor." She swallowed, "The Bene Gesserits will not let such a rumor run wild in the Imperium. We still have some influence. Remember that."
    "Rumor? What rumor? You've certainly held your options open on interbreeding us." He shook his head as she started to speak. "Don't deny it. Let us pass puberty still living in the same household and you in that household, and your influence will be no more than a rag waved in the face of a sandworm." 
    "Do you believe us to be such utter fools?" Jessica asked.
    "Indeed I do. Your Sisterhood is nothing but a bunch of damn fool old women who haven't thought beyond their precious breeding program! Ghani and I know the leverage they have. Do you think us fools?" 
    "Leverage?" 
    "They know you're a Harkonnen! It'll be in their breeding records: Jessica out of Tanidia Nerus by the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen. That record accidentally made public would pull your teeth to --" 
    "You think the Sisterhood would stoop to blackmail?" 
    "I know they would. Oh, they coated it sweetly. They told you to investigate the rumors about your daughter. They fed your curiosity and your fears. They invoked your sense of responsibility, made you feel guilty because you'd fled back to Caladan. And they offered you the prospect of saving your grandchildren." 
    Jessica could only stare at him in silence. It was as though he'd eavesdropped on the emotional meetings with her Proctors from the Sisterhood. She felt completely subdued by his words, and now began to accept the possibility that he spoke truth when he said Alia planned abduction.
    "You see, grandmother, I have a difficult decision to make," he said. "Do I follow the Atreides mystique? Do I live for my subjects . . . and die for them? Or do I choose another course -- one which would permit me to live thousands of years?" 
    Jessica recoiled involuntarily. These words spoken so easily touched on a subject the Bene Gesserits made almost unthinkable. Many Reverend Mothers could choose that course . . . or try it. The manipulation of internal chemistry was available to initiates of the Sisterhood. But if one did it, sooner or later all would try it. There could be no concealing such an accumulation of ageless women. They knew for a certainty that this course would lead them to destruction. Short-lived humanity would turn upon them. No -- it was unthinkable.
    "I don't like the trend of your thoughts," she said.
    "You don't understand my thoughts," he said. "Ghani and I . . ." He shook his head. "Alia had it in her grasp and threw it away."
    "Are you sure of that? I've already sent word to the Sisterhood that Alia practices the unthinkable. Look at her! She's not aged a day since last I . . ."
    "Oh, that!" He dismissed Bene Gesserit body balance with a wave of his hand. "I'm speaking of something else -- a perfection of being far beyond anything humans have ever before achieved." 
    Jessica remained silent, aghast at how easily he'd lifted her disclosure from her. He'd know surely that such a message represented a death sentence on Alia. And no matter how he changed the words, he could only be talking about committing the same offense. Didn't he know the peril of his words?
    "You must explain," she said finally.
    "How?" he asked. "Unless you understand that Time isn't what it appears, I can't even begin to explain. My father suspected it. He stood at the edge of realization, but fell back. Now it's up to Ghani and me."
    "I insist that you explain," Jessica said and she fingered the poisoned needle she held beneath a fold of her robe. It was the gom jabbar, so deadly that the slightest prick of it killed within seconds. And she thought: They warned me I might have to use it. The thought sent the muscles of her arm trembling in waves and she was thankful for the concealing robe.
    "Very well," he sighed. "First, as to Time: there is no difference between ten thousand years and one year; no difference between one hundred thousand years and a heartbeat. No difference. That is the first fact about Time. And the second fact: the entire universe with all of its Time is within me." 
    "What nonsense is this?" she demanded.
    "You see? You don't understand. I will try to explain in another way, then." He raised his right hand to illustrate, moving it as he spoke. "We go forward, we come back." 
    "Those words explain nothing!"
    "That is correct," he said. "There are things which words cannot explain. You must experience them without words. But you are not prepared for such a venture, just as when you look at me you do not see me."
    "But . . . I'm looking directly at you. Of course I see you!" She glared at him. His words reflected knowledge of the Zensunni Codex as she'd been taught it in the Bene Gesserit schools: play of words to confuse one's understanding of philosophy. 
    "Some things occur beyond your control," he said.
    "How does that explain this . . . this perfection which is so far beyond other human experiences?"
    He nodded. "If one delays old age or death by the use of melange or by that learned adjustment of fleshly balance which you Bene Gesserits so rightly fear, such a delay invokes only an illusion of control. Whether one walks rapidly through the sietch or slowly, one traverses the sietch. And that passage of time is experienced internally."
    "Why do you bandy words this way? I cut my wisdom teeth on such nonsense long before even your father was born." 
    "But only the teeth grew," he said. 
    "Words! Words!"
    "Ahhh, you're very close!" 
    "Hah!" 
    "Grandmother?" 
    "Yes?"
    He held his silence for a long space. Then: "You see? You can still respond as yourself." He smiled at her. "But you cannot see past the shadows. I am here." Again he smiled. "My father came very near to this. When he lived, he lived, but when he died, he failed to die." 
    "What're you saying?" 
    "Show me his body!" 
    "Do you think this Preacher . . ." 
    "Possible, but even so, that is not his body." 
    "You've explained nothing," she accused. 
    "Just as I warned you." 
    "Then why . . ."
    "You asked. You had to be shown. Now let us return to Alia and her plan of abduction for --"
    "Are you planning the unthinkable?" she demanded, holding the poisonous gom jabbar at the ready beneath her robe.
    "Will you be her executioner?" he asked, his voice deceptively mild. He pointed a finger at the hand beneath her robe. "Do you think she'll permit you to use that? Or do you think I'd let you use it?" 
    Jessica found she could not swallow.
    "In answer to your question," he said, "I do not plan the unthinkable. I am not that stupid. But I am shocked at you. You dare judge Alia. Of course she's broken the precious Bene Gesserit commandment! What'd you expect? You ran out on her, left her as queen here in all but name. All of that power! So you ran back to Caladan to nurse your wounds in Gurney's arms. Good enough. But who are you to judge Alia?" 
    "I tell you, I will not dis --"
    "Oh, shut up!" He looked away from her in disgust. But his words had been uttered in that special Bene Gesserit way -- the controlling Voice. It silenced her as though a hand had been clapped over her mouth. She thought: Who'd know how to hit me with Voice better than this one? It was a mitigating argument which eased her wounded feelings. As many times as she'd used Voice on others, she'd never expected to be susceptible to it . . . not ever again . . . not since the school days when . . .
    He turned back to her. "I'm sorry. I just happen to know how blindly you can be expected to react when --"
    "Blindly? Me?" She was more outraged by this than she'd been by his exquisite use of Voice against her.
    "You," he said. "Blindly. If you've any honesty left in you at all, you'll recognize your own reactions. I call your name and you say, 'Yes?' I silence your tongue. I invoke all your Bene Gesserit myths. Look inward the way you were taught. That, at least, is something you can do for your --"
    "How dare you! What do you know of . . ." Her voice trailed off. Of course he knew!
    "Look inward, I say!" His voice was imperious.
    Again, his voice enthralled her. She found her senses stilled, felt a quickening of breath. Just beyond awareness lurked a pounding heart, the panting of . . . Abruptly she realized that the quickened breath, the pounding heart, were not latent, not held at bay by her Bene Gesserit control. Eyes widening in shocked awareness, she felt her own flesh obeying other commands. Slowly she recovered her poise, but the realization remained. This unchild had been playing her like a fine instrument throughout their interview.
    "Now you know how profoundly you were conditioned by your precious Bene Gesserits," he said.
    She could only nod. Her belief in words lay shattered. Leto had forced her to look her physical universe squarely in the face, and she'd come away shaken, her mind running with a new awareness. "Show me his body!" He'd shown her her own body as though it were newborn. Not since her earliest schooling days on Wallach, not since those terrifying days before the Duke's buyers came for her, not since then had she felt such trembling uncertainty about her next moments.
    "You will allow yourself to be abducted," Leto said. 
    "But --"
    "I'm not asking for discussion on this point," he said. "You will allow it. Think of this as a command from your Duke. You'll see the purpose when it's done. You're going to confront a very interesting student."
    Leto stood, nodded. He said: "Some actions have an end but no beginning; some begin but do not end. It all depends upon where the observer is standing." Turning, he left her chambers.
    In the second anteroom, Leto met Ghanima hurrying into their private quarters. She stopped as she saw him, said: "Alia's busy with the Convocation of the Faith." She looked a question at the passage which led to Jessica's quarters. 

= = = = = =

Atrocity is recognized as such by victim and perpetrator alike, by all who learn about it at whatever remove. Atrocity has no excuses, no mitigating argument. Atrocity never balances or rectifies the past. Atrocity merely arms the future for more atrocity. It is self-perpetuating upon itself -- a barbarous form of incest. Whoever commits atrocity also commits those future atrocities thus bred.
-The Apocrypha of Muad'Dib

    Shortly after noon, when most of the pilgrims had wandered off to refresh themselves in whatever cooling shade and source of libation they could find. The Preacher entered the great square below Alia's Temple. He came on the arm of his surrogate eyes, young Assan Tariq. In a pocket beneath his flowing robe, The Preacher carried the black gauze mask he'd worn on Salusa Secundus. It amused him to think that the mask and the boy served the same purpose -- disguise. While he needed surrogate eyes, doubts remained alive.
    Let the myth grow, but keep doubts alive, he thought.
    No one must discover that the mask was merely cloth, not an Ixian artifact at all. His hand must not slip from Assan Tariq's bony shoulder. Let The Preacher once walk as the sighted despite his eyeless sockets, and all doubts would dissolve. The small hope he nursed would be dead. Each day he prayed for a change, something different over which he might stumble, but even Salusa Secundus had been a pebble, every aspect known. Nothing changed; nothing could be changed . . . yet.
    Many people marked his passage past the shops and arcades, noting the way he turned his head from side to side, holding it centered on a doorway or a person. The movements of his head were not always blind-natural, and this added to the growing myth.
    Alia watched from a concealed slit in the towering battlement of her temple. She searched that scarred visage far below for some sign -- a sure sign of identity. Every rumor was reported to her. Each new one came with its thrill of fear.
    She'd thought her order to take The Preacher captive would remain secret, but that, too, came back to her now as a rumor. Even among her guards, someone could not remain silent. She hoped now that the guards would follow her new orders and not take this robed mystery captive in a public place where it could be seen and reported.
    It was dusty hot in the square. The Preacher's young guide had pulled the veil of his robe up around his nose, leaving only the dark eyes and a thin patch of forehead exposed. The veil bulged with the outline of a stillsuit's catchtube. This told Alia that they'd come in from the desert. Where did they hide out there?
    The Preacher wore no veil protection from the searing air. He had even dropped the catchtube flap of his stillsuit. His face lay open to the sunlight and the heat shiverings which lifted off the square's paving blocks in visible waves.
    At the Temple steps there stood a group of nine pilgrims making their departure obeisance. The shadowed edge of the square held perhaps fifty more persons, mostly pilgrims devoting themselves to various penances imposed by the priesthood. Among the onlookers could be seen messengers and a few merchants who'd not yet made enough sales to close up for the worst of the day's heat.
    Watching from the open slit, Alia felt the drenching heat and knew herself to be caught between thinking and sensation, the way she'd often seen her brother caught. The temptation to consult within herself rang like an ominous humming in her head. The Baron was there: dutiful, but always ready to play upon her terrors when rational judgment failed and the things around her lost their sense of past, present, and future.
    What if that's Paul down there? she asked herself. 
    "Nonsense!" the voice within her said.
    But the reports of The Preacher's words could not be doubted. Heresy! It terrified her to think that Paul himself might bring down the structure built on his name. 
    Why not?
    She thought of what she'd said in Council just that morning, turning viciously upon Irulan, who'd urged acceptance of the gift of clothing from House Corrino.
    "All gifts to the twins will be examined thoroughly, just as always," Irulan had argued.
    "And when we find the gift harmless?" Alia had cried.
    Somehow that had been the most frightening thing of all: to find that the gift carried no threat.
    In the end they'd accepted the fine clothing and had gone on to the other issue: Was the Lady Jessica to be given a position on the Council? Alia had managed to delay a vote.
    She thought of this as she stared down at The Preacher.
    Things which happened to her Regency now were like the underside of that transformation they inflicted upon this planet. Dune had once symbolized the power of ultimate desert. That power dwindled physically, but the myth of its power grew apace. Only the ocean-desert remained, the great Mother Desert of the inner planet, with its rim of thorn bushes, which Fremen still called Queen of Night. Behind the thorn bushes arose soft green hills bending down to the sand. All the hills were man-made. Every last one of them had been planted by men who had labored like crawling insects. The green of those hills was almost overpowering to someone raised, as Alia had been, in the tradition of dun-shaded sand. In her mind, as in the minds of all Fremen, the ocean-desert still held Dune in a grip which would never relax. She had only to close her eyes and she would see that desert.
    Open eyes at the desert edge saw now the verdant hills, marsh slime reaching out green pseudopods toward the sand -- but the other desert remained as powerful as ever.
    Alia shook her head, stared down at The Preacher.
    He had mounted the first of the terraced steps below the Temple and turned to face the almost deserted square. Alia touched the button beside her window which would amplify voices from below. She felt a wave of self-pity, seeing herself held here in loneliness. Whom could she trust? She'd thought Stilgar remained reliable, but Stilgar had been infected by this blind man.
    "You know how he counts?" Stilgar had asked her. "I heard him counting coins as he paid his guide. It's very strange to my Fremen ears, and that's a terrible thing. He counts 'shuc, ishcai, qimsa, chuascu, picha, sucta, and so on. I've not heard counting like that since the old days in the desert."
    From this, Alia knew that Stilgar could not be sent to do the job which must be done. And she would have to be circumspect with her guards where the slightest emphasis from the Regency tended to be taken as absolute command.
    What was he doing down there, this Preacher?
    The surrounding marketplace beneath its protective balconies and arched arcade still presented a gaudy face: merchandise left on display with a few boys to watch over it. Some few merchants remained awake there sniffing for the spice-biscuit money of the back country or the jingle in a pilgrim's purse.
    Alia studied The Preacher's back. He appeared poised for speech, but something withheld his voice.
    Why do I stand here watching that ruin in ancient flesh? she asked herself. That mortal wreckage down there cannot he the 'vessel of magnificence' which once was my brother.
    Frustration bordering on anger filled her. How could she find out about The Preacher, find out for certain without finding out? She was trapped. She dared not reveal more than a passing curiosity about this heretic.
    Irulan felt it. She'd lost her famous Bene Gesserit poise and screamed in Council: "We've lost the power to think well of ourselves!" 
    Even Stilgar had been shocked.
    Javid had brought them back to their senses: "We don't have time for such nonsense!"
    Javid was right. What did it matter how they thought of themselves? All that concerned them was holding onto the Imperial power.
    But Irulan, recovering her poise, had been even more devastating: "We've lost something vital, I tell you. When we lost it, we lost the ability to make good decisions. We fall upon decisions these days the way we fall upon an enemy -- or wait and wait, which is a form of giving up, and we allow the decisions of others to move us. Have we forgotten that we were the ones who set this current flowing?"
    And all over the question of whether to accept a gift from House Corrino.
    Irulan will have to be disposed of, Alia decided.
    What was that old man down there waiting for? He called himself a preacher. Why didn't he preach?
    Irulan was wrong about our decision-making, Alia told herself. I can still make proper decisions! The person with life-and-death decisions to make must make decisions or remain caught in the pendulum. Paul had always said that stasis was the most dangerous of those things which were not natural. The only permanence was fluid. Change was all that mattered. 
    I'll show them change! Alia thought. 
    The Preacher raised his arms in benediction.
    A few of those remaining in the square moved closer to him, and Alia noted the slowness of that movement. Yes, the rumors were out that The Preacher had aroused Alia's displeasure. She bent closer to the Ixian speaker beside her spy hole. The speaker brought her the murmurings of the people in the square, the sound of wind, the scratching of feet on sand.
    "I bring you four messages!" The Preacher said.
    His voice blared from Alia's speaker, and she turned down the volume.
    "Each message is for a certain person," The Preacher said. "The first message is for Alia, the suzerain of this place." He pointed behind him toward her spy hole. "I bring her a warning: You, who held the secret of duration in your loins, have sold your future for an empty purse!" 
    How dare he? Alia thought. But his words froze her.
    "My second message," The Preacher said, "is for Stilgar, the Fremen Naib, who believes he can translate the power of the tribes into the power of the Imperium. My warning to you, Stilgar: The most dangerous of all creations is a rigid code of ethics. It will turn upon you and drive you into exile!"
    He has gone too far! Alia thought. I must send the guards for him no matter the consequences. But her hands remained at her sides.
    The Preacher turned to face the Temple, climbed to the second step and once more whirled to face the square, all the time keeping his left hand upon the shoulder of his guide. He called out now: "My third message is for the Princess Irulan. Princess! Humiliation is a thing which no person can forget. I warn you to flee!" 
    What's he saying? Alia asked herself. We humiliated Irulan, but . . . Why does he warn her to flee? My decision was just made! A thrill of fear shot through Alia. How did The Preacher know?
    "My fourth message is for Duncan Idaho," he shouted. "Duncan! You were taught to believe that loyalty buys loyalty. Ohh, Duncan, do not believe in history, because history is impelled by whatever passes for money. Duncan! Take your horns and do what you know best how to do."
    Alia chewed the back of her right hand. Horns! She wanted to reach out and press the button which would summon guards, but her hand refused to move.
    "Now I will preach to you," The Preacher said. "This is a sermon of the desert. I direct it to the ears of Muad'Dib's priesthood, those who practice the ecumenism of the sword. Ohhh, you believers in manifest destiny! Know you not that manifest destiny has its demoniac side? You cry out that you find yourselves exalted merely to have lived in the blessed generations of Muad'Dib. I say to you that you have abandoned Muad'Dib. Holiness has replaced love in your religion! You court the vengeance of the desert!" 
    The Preacher lowered his head as though in prayer.
    Alia felt herself shivering with awareness. Gods below! That voice! It had been cracked by years in the burning sands, but it could be the remnant of Paul's voice.
    Once more The Preacher raised his head. His voice boomed out over the square where more people had begun to gather, attracted by this oddity out of the past.
    "Thus it is written!" The Preacher shouted. "They who pray for dew at the desert's edge shall bring forth the deluge! They shall not escape their fate through powers of reason! Reason arises from pride that a man may not know in this way when he has done evil." He lowered his voice. "It was said of Muad'Dib that he died of prescience, that knowledge of the future killed him and he passed from the universe of reality into the alam al-mythal. I say to you that this is the illusion of Maya. Such thoughts have no independent reality. They cannot go out from you and do real things. Muad'Dib said of himself that he possessed no Rihani magic with which to encipher the universe. Do not doubt him."
    Again The Preacher raised his arms, lifted his voice in a stentorian bellow: "I warn the priesthood of Muad'Dib! The fire on the cliff shall burn you! They who learn the lesson of self-deception too well shall perish by that deception. The blood of a brother cannot be cleansed away!"
    He had lowered his arms, found his young guide, and was leaving the square before Alia could break herself from the trembling immobility which had overcome her. Such fearless heresy! It must be Paul. She had to warn her guards. They dared not move against this Preacher openly. The evidence in the square below her confirmed this.
    Despite the heresy, no one moved to stop the departing Preacher. No Temple guard leaped to pursue him. No pilgrim tried to stop him. That charismatic blind man! Everyone who saw or heard him felt his power, the reflection of divine talent.
    In spite of the day's heat, Alia felt suddenly cold. She felt the thin edge of her grip on the Imperium as a physical thing. She gripped the edge of her spy hole window as though to hold her power, thinking of its fragility. The balance of Landsraad, CHOAM, and Fremen arms held the core of power, while Spacing Guild and Bene Gesserit dealt silently in the shadows. The forbidden seepage of technological development which came from the edges of humankind's farthest migrations nibbled at the central power. Products permitted the Ixian and Tleilaxu factories could not relieve the pressure. And always in the wings there stood Farad'n of House Corrino, inheritor of Shaddam TV's titles and claims.
    Without the Fremen, without House Atreides' monopoly on the geriatric spice, her grip would loosen. All the power would dissolve. She could feel it slipping from her right now. People heeded this Preacher. It would be dangerous to silence him; just as dangerous as it was to let him continue preaching such words as he'd shouted across her square today. She could see the first omens of her own defeat and the pattern of the problem stood out clearly in her mind. The Bene Gesserits had codified the problem:
    "A large populace held in check by a small but powerful force is quite a common situation in our universe. And we know the major conditions wherein this large populace may turn upon its keepers --
    "One: When they find a leader. This is the most volatile threat to the powerful; they must retain control of leaders.
    "Two: When the populace recognizes its chains. Keep the populace blind and unquestioning.
    "Three: When the populace perceives a hope of escape from bondage. They must never even believe that escape is possible!" 
    Alia shook her head, feeling her cheeks tremble with the force of movement. The signs were here in her populace. Every report she received from her spies throughout the Imperium reinforced her certain knowledge. Unceasing warfare of the Fremen Jihad left its mark everywhere. Wherever "the ecumenism of the sword" had touched, people retained the attitude of a subject population: defensive, concealing, evasive. All manifestations of authority -- and this meant essentially religious authority -- became subject to resentment. Oh, pilgrims still came in their thronging millions, and some among them were probably devout. But for the most part, pilgrimage had other motivations than devotion. Most often it was a canny surety for the future. It emphasized obedience and gained a real form of power which was easily translated into wealth. The Hajji who returned from Arrakis came home to new authority, new social status. The Hajji could make profitable economic decisions which the planet-bound of his homeworld dared not challenge.
    Alia knew the popular riddle: "What do you see inside the empty purse brought home from Dune?" And the answer: "The eyes of Muad'Dib (fire diamonds)."
    The traditional ways to counter growing unrest paraded themselves before Alia's awareness: people had to be taught that opposition was always punished and assistance to the ruler was always rewarded. Imperial forces must be shifted in random fashion. Major adjuncts to Imperial power had to be concealed. Every movement by which the Regency countered potential attack required delicate timing to keep the opposition off balance. 
    Have I lost my sense of timing? she wondered.
    "What idle speculation is this?" a voice within her asked. She felt herself growing calmer. Yes, the Baron's plan was a good one. We eliminate the threat of the Lady Jessica and, at the same time, we discredit House Corrino. Yes.
    The Preacher could be dealt with later. She understood his posture. The symbolism was clear. He was the ancient spirit of unbridled speculation, the spirit of heresy alive and functioning in her desert of orthodoxy. That was his strength. It didn't matter whether he was Paul . . . as long as that could be kept in doubt. But her Bene Gesserit knowledge told Alia that his strength would contain the key to his weakness.
    The Preacher has a flaw which we will find. I will have him spied upon, watched every moment. And if the opportunity arises, he will be discredited.

= = = = = =

I will not argue with the Fremen claims that they are divinely inspired to transmit a religious revelation, it is their concurrent claim to ideological revelation which inspires me to shower them with derision. Of course, they make the dual claim in the hope that it will strengthen their mandarinate and help them to endure in a universe which finds them increasingly oppressive. It is in the name of all those oppressed people that I warn the Fremen: short-term expediency always fails in the long term.
-The Preacher at Arrakeen

    Leto had come up in the night with Stilgar to the narrow ledge at the crest of the low rock outcropping which Sietch Tabr called The Attendant. Under the waning light of Second Moon, the ledge gave them a panoramic view -- the Shield Wall with Mount Idaho to the north, the Great Flat to the south and rolling dunes eastward toward Habbanya Ridge. Winding dust, the aftermath of a storm, hid the southern horizon. Moonlight frosted the rim of the Shield Wall.
    Stilgar had come against his will, joining the secretive venture finally because Leto aroused his curiosity. Why was it necessary to risk a sand crossing in the night? The lad had threatened to sneak away and make the journey alone if Stilgar refused. The way of it bothered him profoundly, though. Two such important targets alone in the night!
    Leto squatted on the ledge facing south toward the flat. Occasionally he pounded his knee as though in frustration.
    Stilgar waited. He was good at silent waiting, and stood two paces to one side of his charge, arms folded, his robe moving softly in the night breeze.
    For Leto, the sand crossing represented a response to inner desperation, a need to seek a new alignment for his life in a silent conflict which Ghanima could no longer risk. He had maneuvered Stilgar into sharing the journey because there were things Stilgar had to know in preparation for the days ahead.
    Again Leto pounded his knee. It was difficult to know a beginning! He felt, at times, like an extension of those countless other lives, all as real and immediate as his own. In the flow of those lives there was no ending, no accomplishment -- only eternal beginning. They could be a mob, too, clamoring at him as though he were a single window through which each desired to peer. And there lay the peril which had destroyed Alia.
    Leto stared outward at the moonlight silvering the storm remnants. Folds and overfolds of dunes spread across the flat: silica grit measured out by the winds, mounded into waves -- pea sand, grit sand, pebbles. He felt himself caught in one of those poised moments just before dawn. Time pressed at him. It was already the month of Akkad and behind him lay the last of an interminable waiting time: long hot days and hot dry winds, nights like this one tormented by gusts and endless blowings from the furnace lands of the Hawkbled. He glanced over his shoulder toward the Shield Wall, a broken line in starlight. Beyond that wall in the Northern Sink lay the focus of his problems.
    Once more he looked to the desert. As he stared into the hot darkness, day dawned, the sun rising out of dust scarves and placing a touch of lime into the storm's red streamers. He closed his eyes, willing himself to see how this day would appear from Arrakeen, and the city lay there in his consciousness, caught up like a scattering of boxes between the light and the new shadows. Desert . . . boxes . . . desert . . . boxes . . .
    When he opened his eyes, the desert remained: a spreading curry expanse of wind-kicked sand. Oily shadows along the base of each dune reached out like rays of the night just past. They linked one time with the other. He thought of the night, squatting here with Stilgar restless beside him, the older man worried at the silence and the unexplained reasons for coming to this place. Stilgar must have many memories of passing this way with his beloved Muad'Dib. Even now Stilgar was moving, scanning all around, alert for dangers. Stilgar did not like the open in daylight. He was pure old Fremen in that.
    Leto's mind was reluctant to leave the night and the clean exertions of a sand crossing. Once here in the rocks, the night had taken on its black stillness. He sympathized with Stilgar's daylight fears. Black was a single thing even when it contained boiling terrors. Light could be many things. Night held its fear smells and its things which came with slithering sounds. Dimensions separated in the night, everything amplified -- thorns sharper, blades more cutting. But terrors of the day could be worse.
    Stilgar cleared his throat.
    Leto spoke without turning: "I have a very serious problem, Stil."
    "So I surmised." The voice beside Leto came low and wary. The child had sounded disturbingly of the father. It was a thing of forbidden magic which touched a cord of revulsion in Stilgar. Fremen knew the terrors of possession. Those found possessed were rightfully killed and their water cast upon the sand lest it contaminate the tribal cistern. The dead should remain dead. It was correct to find one's immortality in children, but children had no right to assume too exact a shape from their past.
    "My problem is that my father left so many things undone," Leto said. "Especially the focus of our lives. The Empire cannot go on this way, Stil, without a proper focus for human life. I am speaking of life, you understand? Life, not death." 
    "Once, when he was troubled by a vision, your father spoke in this vein to me," Stilgar said.
    Leto found himself tempted to pass off that questioning fear beside him with a light response, perhaps a suggestion that they break their fast. He realized that he was very hungry. They had eaten the previous noon and Leto had insisted on fasting through the night. But another hunger drew him now.
    The trouble with my life is the trouble with this place, Leto thought. No preliminary creation. I just go back and back and back until distances fade away. I cannot see the horizon; I cannot see Habbanya Ridge. I can't find the original place of testing.
    "There's really no substitute for prescience," Leto said. "Perhaps I should risk the spice . . ." 
    "And be destroyed as your father was?" 
    "A dilemma," Leto said.
    "Once your father confided in me that knowing the future too well was to be locked into that future to the exclusion of any freedom to change."
    "The paradox which is our problem," Leto said. "It's a subtle and powerful thing, prescience. The future becomes now. To be sighted in the land of the blind carries its own perils. If you try to interpret what you see for the blind, you tend to forget that the blind possess an inherent movement conditioned by their blindness. They are like a monstrous machine moving along its own path. They have their own momentum, their own fixations. I fear the blind, Stil. I fear them. They can so easily crush anything in their path." 
    Stilgar stared at the desert. Lime dawn had become steel day. He said: "Why have we come to this place?" 
    "Because I wanted you to see the place where I may die." 
    Stilgar tensed. Then: "So you have had a vision!" 
    "Perhaps it was only a dream."
    "Why do we come to such a dangerous place?" Stilgar glared down at his charge. "We will return at once." 
    "I won't die today, Stil." 
    "No? What was this vision?"
    "I saw three paths," Leto said. His voice came out with the sleepy sound of remembrance. "One of those futures requires me to kill our grandmother."
    Stilgar shot a sharp glance back toward Sietch Tabr, as though he feared the Lady Jessica could hear them across the sandy distance. "Why?" 
    "To keep from losing the spice monopoly." 
    "I don't understand."
    "Nor do I. But that is the thought of my dream when I use the knife."
    "Oh." Stilgar understood the use of a knife. He drew a deep breath. "What is the second path?" 
    "Ghani and I marry to seal the Atreides bloodline." 
    "Ghaaa!" Stilgar expelled his breath in a violent expression of distaste.
    "It was usual in ancient times for kings and queens to do this," Leto said. "Ghani and I have decided we will not breed." 
    "I warn you to hold fast in that decision!" There was death in Stilgar's voice. By Fremen Law, incest was punishable by death on the hanging tripod. He cleared his throat, asked: "And the third path?" 
    "I am called to reduce my father to human stature." 
    "He was my friend, Muad'Dib," Stilgar muttered. 
    "He was your god! I must undeify him."
    Stilgar turned his back on the desert, stared toward the oasis of his beloved Sietch Tabr. Such talk always disturbed him.
    Leto sensed the sweaty smell of Stilgar's movement. It was such a temptation to avoid the purposeful things which had to be said here. They could talk half the day away, moving from the specific to the abstract as through drawn away from real decisions, from those immediate necessities which confronted them. And there was no doubt that House Corrino posed a real threat to real lives -- his own and Ghani's. But everything he did now had to be weighed and tested against the secret necessities. Stilgar once had voted to have Farad'n assassinated, holding out for the subtle application of chaumurky: poison administered in a drink. Farad'n was known to be partial to certain sweet liquors. That could not be permitted.
    "If I die here, Stil," Leto said, "you must beware of Alia. She is no longer your friend."
    "What is this talk of death and your aunt?" Now Stilgar was truly outraged. Kill the Lady Jessica! Beware of Alia! Die in this place!
    "Small men change their faces at her command," Leto said. "A ruler need not be a prophet, Stil. Nor even godlike. A ruler need only be sensitive. I brought you here with me to clarify what our Imperium requires. It requires good government. That does not depend upon laws or precedent, but upon the personal qualities of whoever governs."
    "The Regency handles its Imperial duties quite well," Stilgar said. "When you come of age --"
    "I am of age! I'm the oldest person here! You're a puling infant beside me. I can remember times more than fifty centuries past. Hah! I can even remember when we Fremen were on Thurgrod."
    "Why do you play with such fancies?" Stilgar demanded, his tone peremptory.
    Leto nodded to himself. Why indeed? Why recount his memories of those other centuries? Today's Fremen were his immediate problem, most of them still only half-tamed savages, prone to laugh at unlucky innocence.
    "The crysknife dissolves at the death of its owner," Leto said. "Muad'Dib has dissolved. Why are the Fremen still alive?" 
    It was one of those abrupt thought changes which so confounded Stilgar. He found himself temporarily dumb. Such words contained meaning, but their intent eluded him.
    "I am expected to be Emperor, but I must be the servant," Leto said. He glanced across his shoulder at Stilgar. "My grandfather for whom I was named added new words to his coat of arms when he came here to Dune: 'Here I am; here I remain.' " 
    "He had no choice," Stilgar said.
    "Very good, Stil. Nor have I any choice. I should be the Emperor by birth, by the fitness of my understanding, by all that has gone into me. I even know what the Imperium requires: good government."
    "Naib has an ancient meaning," Stilgar said. "It is 'servant of the Sietch.' "
    "I remember your training, Stil," Leto said. "For proper government, the tribe must have ways to choose men whose lives reflect the way a government should behave."
    From the depths of his Fremen soul, Stilgar said: "You'll assume the Imperial Mantle if it's meet. First you must prove that you can behave in the fashion of a ruler!"
    Unexpectedly, Leto laughed. Then: "Do you doubt my sincerity, Stil?" 
    "Of course not." 
    "My birthright?" 
    "You are who you are."
    "And if I do what is expected of me, that is the measure of my sincerity, eh?" 
    "It is the Fremen practice." 
    "Then I cannot have inner feelings to guide my behavior?" 
    "I don't understand what --"
    "If I always behave with propriety, no matter what it costs me to suppress my own desires, then that is the measure of me." 
    "Such is the essence of self-control, youngster." 
    "Youngster!" Leto shook his head. "Ahhh, Stil, you provide me with the key to a rational ethic of government. I must be constant, every action rooted in the traditions of the past." 
    "That is proper." 
    "But my past goes deeper than yours!" 
    "What difference --"
    "I have no first person singular, Stil. I am a multiple person with memories of traditions more ancient than you could imagine. That's my burden, Stil. I'm past-directed. I'm abrim with innate knowledge which resists newness and change. Yet Muad'Dib changed all this." He gestured at the desert, his arm sweeping to encompass the Shield Wall behind him.
    Stilgar turned to peer at the Shield Wall. A village had been built beneath the wall since Muad'Dib's time, houses to shelter a planetology crew helping spread plant life into the desert. Stilgar stared at the man-made intrusion into the landscape. Change? Yes. There was an alignment to the village, a trueness which offended him. He stood silently, ignoring the itching of grit particles under his stillsuit. That village was an offense against the thing this planet had been. Suddenly Stilgar wanted a circular howling of wind to leap over the dunes and obliterate that place. The sensation left him trembling.
    Leto said: "Have you noticed, Stil, that the new stillsuits are of sloppy manufacture? Our water loss is too high."
    Stilgar stopped himself on the point of asking: Have I not said it? Instead he said: "Our people grow increasingly dependent upon the pills."
    Leto nodded. The pills shifted body temperature, reduced water loss. They were cheaper and easier than stillsuits. But they inflicted the user with other burdens, among them a tendency to slowed reaction time, occasional blurred vision.
    "Is that why we came out here?" Stilgar asked. "To discuss stillsuit manufacture?"
    "Why not?" Leto asked. "Since you will not face what I must talk about." 
    "Why must I beware of your aunt?" Anger edged his voice.
    "Because she plays upon the old Fremen desire to resist charge, yet would bring more terrible change than you can imagine." 
    "You make much out of little! She's a proper Fremen." 
    "Ahhh, then the proper Fremen holds to the ways of the past and I have an ancient past. Stil, were I to give free reign to this inclination, I would demand a closed society, completely dependent upon the sacred ways of the past. I would control migration, explaining that this fosters new ideas, and new ideas are a threat to the entire structure of life. Each little planetary polis would go its own way, becoming what it would. Finally the Empire would shatter under the weight of its differences."
    Stilgar tried to swallow in a dry throat. These were words which Muad'Dib might have produced. They had his ring to them. They were paradox, frightening. But if one allowed any change . . . He shook his head.
    "The past may show the right way to behave if you live in the past, Stil, but circumstances change."
    Stilgar could only agree that circumstances did change. How must one behave then? He looked beyond Leto, seeing the desert and not seeing it. Muad'Dib had walked there. The flat was a place of golden shadows as the sun climbed, purple shadows, gritty rivulets crested in dust vapors. The dust fog which usually hung over Habbanya Ridge was visible in the far distance now, and the desert between presented his eyes with dunes diminishing, one curve into another. Through the smoky shimmer of heat he saw the plants which crept out from the desert edge. Muad'Dib had caused life to sprout in that desolate place. Copper, gold, red flowers, yellow flowers, rust and russet, grey-green leaves, spikes and harsh shadows beneath bushes. The motion of the day's heat set shadows quivering, vibrating in the air.
    Presently Stilgar said: "I am only a leader of Fremen; you are the son of a Duke." 
    "Not knowing what you said, you said it," Leto said.
    Stilgar scowled. Once, long ago, Muad'Dib had chided him thus.
    "You remember it, don't you, Stil?" Leto asked. "We were under Habbanya Ridge and the Sardaukar captain -- remember him: Aramsham? He killed his friend to save himself. And you warned several times that day about preserving the lives of Sardaukar who'd seen our secret ways. Finally you said they would surely reveal what they'd seen; they must be killed. And my father said: 'Not knowing what you said, you said it.' And you were hurt. You told him you were only a simple leader of Fremen. Dukes must know more important things."
    Stilgar stared down at Leto. We were under Habbanya Ridge! We! This . . . this child, not even conceived on that day, knew what had taken place in exact detail, the kind of detail which could only be known to someone who had been there. It was only another proof that these Atreides children could not be judged by ordinary standards.
    "Now you will listen to me," Leto said. "If I die or disappear in the desert, you are to flee from Sietch Tabr. I command it. You are to take Ghani and --" 
    "You are not yet my Duke! You're a . . . a child!" 
    "I'm an adult in a child's flesh," Leto said. He pointed down to a narrow crack in the rocks below them. "If I die here, it will be in that place. You will see the blood. You will know then. Take my sister and --"
    "I'm doubling your guard," Stilgar said. "You're not coming out here again. We are leaving now and you --"
    "Stil! You cannot hold me. Turn your mind once more to that time at Habbanya Ridge. Remember? The factory crawler was out there on the sand and a big Maker was coming. There was no way to save the crawler from the worm. And my father was annoyed that he couldn't save that crawler. But Gurney could think only of the men he'd lost in the sand. Remember what he said: 'Your father would've been more concerned for the men he couldn't save.' Stil, I charge you to save people. They're more important than things. And Ghani is the most precious of all because, without me, she is the only hope for the Atreides."
    "I will hear no more," Stilgar said. He turned and began climbing down the rocks toward the oasis across the sand. He heard Leto following. Presently Leto passed him and, glancing back, said: "Have you noticed, Stil, how beautiful the young women are this year?"

= = = = = =

The life of a single human, as the life of a family or an entire people, persists as memory. My people must come to see this as part of their maturing process. They are people as organism, and in this persistent memory they store more and more experiences in a subliminal reservoir. Humankind hopes to call upon this material if it is needed for a changing universe. But much that is stored can be lost in that chance play of accident which we call "fate." Much may not be integrated into evolutionary relationships, and thus may not be evaluated and keyed into activity by those ongoing environmental changes which inflict themselves upon flesh. The species can forget! This is the special value of the Kwisatz Haderach which the Bene Gesserits never suspected: the Kwisatz Haderach cannot forget.
-The Book of Leto, After Harq al-Ada

    Stilgar could not explain it, but he found Leto's casual observation profoundly disturbing. It ground through his awareness all the way back across the sand to Sietch Tabr, taking precedence over everything else Leto had said out there on The Attendant.
    Indeed, the young women of Arrakis were very beautiful that year. And the young men, too. Their faces glowed serenely with water-richness. Their eyes looked outward and far. They exposed their features often without any pretense of stillsuit masks and the snaking lines of catchtubes. Frequently they did not even wear stillsuits in the open, preferring the new garments which, as they moved, offered flickering suggestions of the lithe young bodies beneath.
    Such human beauty was set off against the new beauty of the landscape. By contrast with the old Arrakis, the eye could be spellbound by its collision with a tiny clump of green twigs growing among red-brown rocks. And the old sietch warrens of the cave-metropolis culture, complete with elaborate seals and moisture traps at every entrance, were giving way to open villages built often of mud bricks. Mud bricks!
    Why did I want the village destroyed? Stilgar wondered, and he stumbled as he walked.
    He knew himself to be of a dying breed. Old Fremen gasped in wonder at the prodigality of their planet -- water wasted into the air for no more than its ability to mold building bricks. The water for a single one-family dwelling would keep an entire sietch alive for a year.
    The new buildings even had transparent windows to let in the sun's heat and to desiccate the bodies within. Such windows opened outward.
    New Fremen within their mud homes could look out upon their landscape. They no longer were enclosed and huddling in a sietch. Where the new vision moved, there also moved the imagination. Stilgar could feel this. The new vision joined Fremen to the rest of the Imperial universe, conditioned them to unbounded space. Once they'd been tied to water-poor Arrakis by their enslavement to its bitter necessities. They'd not shared that open-mindedness which conditioned inhabitants on most planets of the Imperium.
    Stilgar could see the changes contrasting with his own doubts and fears. In the old days it had been a rare Fremen who even considered the possibility that he might leave Arrakis to begin a new life on one of the water-rich worlds. They'd not even been permitted the dream of escape.
    He watched Leto's moving back as the youth walked ahead. Leto had spoken of prohibitions against movement off-planet. Well, that had always been a reality for most other-worlders, even where the dream was permitted as a safety valve. But planetary serfdom had reached its peak here on Arrakis. Fremen had turned inward, barricaded in their minds as they were barricaded in their cave warrens.
    The very meaning of sietch -- a place of sanctuary in times of trouble -- had been perverted here into a monstrous confinement for an entire population.
    Leto spoke the truth: Muad'Dib had changed all that.
    Stilgar felt lost, He could feel his old beliefs crumbling. The new outward vision produced life which desired to move away from containment.
    "How beautiful the young women are this year." 
    The old ways (My ways! he admitted) had forced his people to ignore all history except that which turned inward onto their own travail. The old Fremen had read history out of their own terrible migrations, their flights from persecution into persecution. The old planetary government had followed the stated policy of the old Imperium. They had suppressed creativity and all sense of progress, of evolution. Prosperity had been dangerous to the old Imperium and its holders of power.
    With an abrupt shock, Stilgar realized that these things were equally dangerous to the course which Alia was setting. 
    Again Stilgar stumbled and fell farther behind Leto.
    In the old ways and old religions, there'd been no future, only an endless now. Before Muad'Dib, Stilgar saw, the Fremen had been conditioned to believe in failure, never in the possibility of accomplishment. Well . . . they'd believed Liet-Kynes, but he'd set a forty-generation timescale. That was no accomplishment; that was a dream which, he saw now, had also turned inward. 
    Muad'Dib had changed that!
    During the Jihad, Fremen had learned much about the old Padishah Emperor, Shaddam IV. The eighty-first Padishah of House Corrino to occupy the Golden Lion Throne and reign over this Imperium of uncounted worlds had used Arrakis as a testing place for those policies which he hoped to implement in the rest of his empire. His planetary governors on Arrakis had cultivated a persistent pessimism to bolster their power base. They'd made sure that everyone on Arrakis, even the free-roaming Fremen, became familiar with numerous cases of injustice and insoluble problems; they had been taught to think of themselves as a helpless people for whom there was no succor.
    "How beautiful the young women are this year!" 
    As he watched Leto's retreating back, Stilgar began to wonder how the youth had set these thoughts flowing -- and just by uttering a seemingly simple statement. Because of that statement, Stilgar found himself viewing Alia and his own role on the Council in an entirely different way.
    Alia was fond of saying that old ways gave ground slowly. Stilgar admitted to himself that he'd always found this statement vaguely reassuring. Change was dangerous. Invention must be suppressed. Individual willpower must be denied. What other function did the priesthood serve than to deny individual will?
    Alia kept saying that opportunities for open competition had to be reduced to manageable limits. But that meant the recurrent threat of technology could only be used to confine populations -- just as it had served its ancient masters. Any permitted technology had to be rooted in ritual. Otherwise . . . otherwise . . .
    Again Stilgar stumbled. He was at the qanat now and saw Leto waiting beneath the apricot orchard which grew along the flowing water. Stilgar heard his feet moving through uncut grass. 
    Uncut grass!
    What can I believe? Stilgar asked himself.
    It was proper for a Fremen of his generation to believe that individuals needed a profound sense of their own limitations. Traditions were surely the most controlling element in a secure society. People had to know the boundaries of their time, of their society, of their territory. What was wrong with the sietch as a model for all thinking? A sense of enclosure should pervade every individual choice -- should fence in the family, the community, and every step taken by a proper government.
    Stilgar came to a stop and stared across the orchard at Leto. The youth stood there, regarding him with a smile. 
    Does he know the turmoil in my head? Stilgar wondered.
    And the old Fremen Naib tried to fall back on the traditional catechism of his people. Each aspect of life required a single form, its inherent circularity based on secret inner knowledge of what will work and what will not work. The model for life, for the community, for every element of the larger society right up to and beyond the peaks of government -- that model had to be the sietch and its counterpart in the sand: Shai-Hulud. The giant sandworm was surely a most formidable creature, but when threatened it hid in the impenetrable deeps.
    Change is dangerous! Stilgar told himself. Sameness and stability were the proper goals of government. 
    But the young men and women were beautiful.
    And they remembered the words of Muad'Dib as he deposed Shaddam IV: "It's not long life to the Emperor that I seek; it's long life to the Imperium." 
    Isn't that what I've been saying to myself? Stilgar wondered.
    He resumed walking, headed toward the sietch entrance slightly to Leto's right. The youth moved to intercept him.
    Muad'Dib had said another thing, Stilgar reminded himself: "just as individuals are born, mature, breed, and die, so do societies and civilizations and governments."
    Dangerous or not, there would be change. The beautiful young Fremen knew this. They could look outward and see it, prepare for it.
    Stilgar was forced to stop. It was either that or walk right over Leto.
    The youth peered up at him owlishly, said: "You see, Stil? Tradition isn't the absolute guide you thought it was."

= = = = = =

A Fremen dies when he is too long from the desert; this we call "the water sickness."
-Stilgar, the Commentaries

    "It is difficult for me, asking you to do this," Alia said. "But . . . I must insure that there's an empire for Paul's children to inherit. There's no other reason for the Regency." 
    Alia turned from where she was seated at a mirror completing her morning toilet. She looked at her husband, measuring how he absorbed these words. Duncan Idaho deserved careful study in these moments; there was no doubt that he'd become something far more subtle and dangerous than the one-time swordmaster of House Atreides. The outer appearance remained similar -- the black goat hair over sharp dark features -- but in the long years since his awakening from the ghola state he had undergone an inner metamorphosis.
    She wondered now, as she had wondered many times, what the ghola rebirth-after-death might have hidden in the secret loneliness of him. Before the Tleilaxu had worked their subtle science on him, Duncan's reactions had borne clear labels for the Atreides -- loyalty, fanatic adherence to the moral code of his mercenary forebears, swift to anger and swift to recover. He had been implacable in his resolve for revenge against House Harkonnen. And he had died saving Paul. But the Tleilaxu had bought his body from the Sardaukar and, in their regeneration vats, they had grown a zombie-katrundo: the flesh of Duncan Idaho, but none of his conscious memories. He'd been trained as a mentat and sent as a gift, a human computer for Paul, a fine tool equipped with a hypnotic compulsion to slay his owner. The flesh of Duncan Idaho had resisted that compulsion and, in the intolerable stress, his cellular past had come back to him.
    Alia had decided long ago that it was dangerous to think of him as Duncan in the privacy of her thoughts. Better to think of him by his ghola name, Hayt. Far better. And it was essential that he get not the slightest glimpse of the old Baron Harkonnen sitting there in her mind.
    Duncan saw Alia studying him, turned away. Love could not hide the changes in her, nor conceal from him the transparency of her motives. The many-faceted metal eyes which the Tleilaxu had given him were cruel in their ability to penetrate deception. They limned her now as a gloating, almost masculine figure, and he could not stand to see her thus.
    "Why do you turn away?" Alia asked.
    "I must think about this thing," he said. "The Lady Jessica is . . . an Atreides."
    "And your loyalty is to House Atreides, not to me," Alia pouted.
    "Don't put such fickle interpretations into me," he said. 
    Alia pursed her lips. Had she moved too rapidly?
    Duncan crossed to the chambered opening which looked down on a corner of the Temple plaza. He could see pilgrims beginning to gather there, the Arrakeen traders moving in to feed on the edges like a pack of predators upon a herd of beasts. He focused on a particular group of tradesmen, spice-fiber baskets over their arms, Fremen mercenaries a pace behind them. They moved with a stolid force through the gathering throng.
    "They sell pieces of etched marble," he said, pointing. "Did you know that? They set the pieces out in the desert to be etched by stormsands. Sometimes they find interesting patterns in the stone. They call it a new art form, very popular: genuine storm-etched marble from Dune. I bought a piece of it last week -- a golden tree with five tassels, lovely but very fragile." 
    "Don't change the subject," Alia said.
    "I haven't changed the subject," he said. "It's beautiful, but it's not art. Humans create art by their own violence, by their own volition." He put his right hand on the windowsill. "The twins detest this city and I'm afraid I see their point."
    "I fail to see the association," Alia said. "The abduction of my mother is not a real abduction. She will be safe as your captive." 
    "This city was built by the blind," he said. "Did you know that Leto and Stilgar went out from Sietch Tabr into the desert last week? They were gone the whole night."
    "It was reported to me," she said. "These baubles from the sand -- would you have me prohibit their sale?"
    "That'd be bad for business," he said, turning. "Do you know what Stilgar said when I asked why they went out on the sand that way? He said Leto wished to commune with the spirit of Muad'Dib."
    Alia felt the sudden coldness of panic, looked in the mirror a moment to recover. Leto would not venture from the sietch at night for such nonsense. Was it a conspiracy?
    Idaho put a hand over his eyes to blot out the sight of her, said: "Stilgar told me he went along with Leto because he still believes in Muad'Dib." 
    "Of course he does!"
    Idaho chuckled, a hollow sound. "He said he still believes because Muad'Dib was always for the little people." 
    "What did you say to that?" Alia asked, her voice betraying her fear.
    Idaho dropped his hand from his eyes. "I said, 'That must make you one of the little people.' "
    "Duncan! That's a dangerous game. Bait that Fremen Naib and you could awaken a beast to destroy us all."
    "He still believes in Muad'Dib," Idaho said. "That's our protection." 
    "What was his reply?" 
    "He said he knew his own mind." 
    "I see."
    "No . . . I don't believe you do. Things that bite have longer teeth than Stilgar's."
    "I don't understand you today, Duncan. I ask you to do a very important thing, a thing vital to . . . What is all of this rambling?" 
    How petulant she sounded. He turned back to the chambered window. "When I was trained as a mentat . . . It is very difficult, Alia, to learn how to work your own mind. You learn first that the mind must be allowed to work itself. That's very strange. You can work your own muscles, exercise them, strengthen them, but the mind acts of itself. Sometimes, when you have learned this about the mind, it shows you things you do not want to see." 
    "And that's why you tried to insult Stilgar?" 
    "Stilgar doesn't know his own mind; he doesn't let it run free." 
    "Except in the spice orgy."
    "Not even there. That's what makes him a Naib. To be a leader of men, he controls and limits his reactions. He does what is expected of him. Once you know this, you know Stilgar and you can measure the length of his teeth."
    "That's the Fremen way," she said. "Well, Duncan, will you do it, or won't you? She must be taken and it must be made to look like the work of House Corrino."
    He remained silent, weighing her tone and arguments in his mentat way. This abduction plan spoke of a coldness and a cruelty whose dimensions, thus revealed, shocked him. Risk her own mother's life for the reasons thus far produced? Alia was lying. Perhaps the whisperings about Alia and Javid were true. This thought produced an icy hardness in his stomach. 
    "You're the only one I can trust for this," Alia said. 
    "I know that," he said.
    She took this as acceptance, smiled at herself in the mirror.
    "You know," Idaho said, "the mentat learns to look at every human as a series of relationships."
    Alia did not respond. She sat, caught in a personal memory which drew a blank expression on her face. Idaho, glancing over his shoulder at her, saw the expression and shuddered. It was as though she communed with voices heard only by herself. 
    "Relationships," he whispered.
    And he thought: One must cast off old agonies as a snake casts off its skin -- only to grow a new set and accept all of their limitations. It was the same with governments -- even the Regency. Old governments can be traced like discarded molts. I must carry out this scheme, but not in the way Alia commands.
    Presently Alia shook her shoulders, said: "Leto should not be going out like that in these times. I will reprimand him." 
    "Not even with Stilgar?" 
    "Not even with him."
    She arose from her mirror, crossed to where Idaho stood beside the window, put a hand on his arm.
    He repressed a shiver, reduced this reaction to a mentat computation. Something in her revolted him. 
    Something in her.
    He could not bring himself to look at her. He smelled the melange of her cosmetics, cleared his throat.
    She said: "I will be busy today examining Farad'n's gifts." 
    "The clothing?"
    "Yes. Nothing he does is what it seems. And we must remember that his Bashar, Tyekanik, is an adept of chaumurky, chaumas, and all the other subtleties of royal assassination." 
    "The price of power," he said, pulling away from her. "But we're still mobile and Farad'n is not."
    She studied his chiseled profile. Sometimes the workings of his mind were difficult to fathom. Was he thinking only that freedom of action gave life to a military power? Well, life on Arrakis had been too secure for too long. Senses once whetted by omnipresent dangers could degenerate when not used. 
    "Yes," she said, "we still have the Fremen." 
    "Mobility," he repeated. "We cannot degenerate into infantry. That'd be foolish."
    His tone annoyed her, and she said: "Farad'n will use any means to destroy us."
    "Ahhh, that's it," he said. "That's a form of initiative, a mobility which we didn't have in the old days. We had a code, the code of House Atreides. We always paid our way and let the enemy be the pillagers. That restriction no longer holds, of course. We're equally mobile. House Atreides and House Corrino." 
    "We abduct my mother to save her from harm as much as for any other reason," Alia said. "We still live by the code!" 
    He looked down at her. She knew the dangers of inciting a mentat to compute. Didn't she realize what he had computed? Yet . . . he still loved her. He brushed a hand across his eyes. How youthful she looked. The Lady Jessica was correct: Alia gave the appearance of not having aged a day in their years together. She still possessed the soft features of her Bene Gesserit mother, but her eyes were Atreides -- measuring, demanding, hawklike. And now something possessed of cruel calculation lurked behind those eyes.
    Idaho had served House Atreides for too many years not to understand the family's strengths as well as their weaknesses. But this thing in Alia, this was new. The Atreides might play a devious game against enemies, but never against friends and allies, and not at all against Family. It was ground into the Atreides manner: support your own populace to the best of your ability; show them how much better they lived under the Atreides. Demonstrate your love for your friends by the candor of your behavior with them. What Alia asked now, though, was not Atreides. He felt this with all of his body's flesh and nerve structure. He was a unit, indivisible, feeling this alien attitude in Alia.
    Abruptly his mentat sensorium clicked into full awareness and his mind leaped into the frozen trance where Time did not exist; only the computation existed. Alia would recognize what had happened to him, but that could not be helped. He gave himself up to the computation.
    Computation: A reflected Lady Jessica lived out a pseudo-life in Alia's awareness. He saw this as he saw the reflected pre-ghola Duncan Idaho which remained a constant in his own awareness. Alia had this awareness by being one of the pre-born. He had it out of the Tleilaxu regeneration tanks. Yet Alia denied that reflection, risked her mother's life. Therefore Alia was not in contact with that pseudo-Jessica within. Therefore Alia was completely possessed by another pseudo-life to the exclusion of all others. 
    Possessed! 
    Alien!
    Abomination!
    Mentat fashion, he accepted this, turned to other facets of his problem. All of the Atreides were on this one planet. Would House Corrino risk attack from space? His mind flashed through the review of those conventions which had ended primitive forms of warfare:
    One -- All planets were vulnerable to attack from space; ergo: retaliation / revenge facilities were set up off-planet by every House Major. Farad'n would know that the Atreides had not omitted this elementary precaution.
    Two -- Force shields were a complete defense against projectiles and explosives of non-atomic type, the basic reason why hand-to-hand conflict had reentered human combat. But infantry had its limits. House Corrino might have brought their Sardaukar back to a pre-Arrakeen edge, but they still could be no match for the abandoned ferocity of Fremen.
    Three -- Planetary feudalism remained in constant danger from a large technical class, but the effects of the Butlerian Jihad continued as a damper on technological excesses. Ixians, Tleilaxu, and a few scattered outer planets were the only possible threat in this regard, and they were planet-vulnerable to the combined wrath of the rest of the Imperium. The Butlerian Jihad would not be undone. Mechanized warfare required a large technical class. The Atreides Imperium had channeled this force into other pursuits. No large technical class existed unwatched. And the Empire remained safely feudalist, naturally, since that was the best social form for spreading over widely dispersed wild frontiers -- new planets.
    Duncan felt his mentat awareness coruscate as it shot through memory data of itself, completely impervious to the passage of time. Arriving at the conviction that House Corrino would not risk an illegal atomic attack, he did this in flash-computation, the main decisional pathway, but he was perfectly aware of the elements which went into this conviction: The Imperium commanded as many nuclear and allied weapons as all the Great Houses combined. At least half the Great Houses would react without thinking if House Corrino broke the Convention. The Atreides off-planet retaliation system would be joined by overwhelming force, and no need to summon any of them. Fear would do the calling. Salusa Secundus and its allies would vanish in hot clouds. House Corrino would not risk such a holocaust. They were undoubtedly sincere in subscribing to the argument that nuclear weapons were a reserve held for one purpose: defense of humankind should a threatening "other intelligence" ever be encountered.
    The computational thoughts had clean edges, sharp relief. There were no blurred between-places. Alia chose abduction and terror because she had become alien, non-Atreides. House Corrino was a threat, but not in the ways which Alia argued in Council. Alia wanted the Lady Jessica removed because that searing Bene Gesserit intelligence had seen what only now had become clear to him.
    Idaho shook himself out of the mentat trance, saw Alia standing in front of him, a coldly measuring expression on her face.
    "Wouldn't you rather the Lady Jessica were killed?" he asked.
    The alien-flash of her joy lay exposed before his eyes for a brief instant before being covered by false outrage. "Duncan!" 
    Yes, this alien-Alia preferred matricide.
    "You are afraid of your mother, not for her," he said.
    She spoke without a change in her measuring stare. "Of course I am. She has reported about me to the Sisterhood." 
    "What do you mean?"
    "Don't you know the greatest temptation for a Bene Gesserit?" She moved closer to him, seductive, looked upward at him through her lashes. "I thought only to keep myself strong and alert for the sake of the twins." 
    "You speak of temptation," he said, his voice mentat-flat.
    "It's the thing which the Sisterhood hides most deeply, the thing they most fear. It's why they call me Abomination. They know their inhibitions won't hold me back. Temptation -- they always speak with heavy emphasis: Great Temptation. You see, we who employ the Bene Gesserit teachings can influence such things as the internal adjustment of enzyme balance within our bodies. It can prolong youth -- far longer than with melange. Do you see the consequences should many Bene Gesserits do this? It would be noticed. I'm sure you compute the accuracy of what I'm saying. Melange is what makes us the target for so many plots. We control a substance which prolongs life. What if it became known that Bene Gesserits controlled an even more potent secret? You see! Not one Reverend Mother would be safe. Abduction and torture of Bene Gesserits would become a most common activity." 
    "You've accomplished this enzyme balancing." It was a statement, not a question.
    "I've defied the Sisterhood! My mother's reports to the Sisterhood will make the Bene Gesserits unswerving allies of House Corrino."
    How very plausible, he thought.
    He tested: "But surely your own mother would not turn against you!"
    "She was Bene Gesserit long before she was my mother, Duncan, she permitted her own son, my brother, to undergo the test of the gom jabbar! She arranged it! And she knew he might not survive it! Bene Gesserits have always been short on faith and long on pragmatism. She'll act against me if she believes it's in the best interests of the Sisterhood." 
    He nodded. How convincing she was. It was a sad thought.
    "We must hold the initiative," she said. "That's our sharpest weapon."
    "There's the problem of Gurney Halleck," he said. "Do I have to kill my old friend?"
    "Gurney's off on some spy errand in the desert," she said, knowing Idaho already was aware of this. "He's safely out of the way."
    "Very odd," he said, "the Regent Governor of Caladan running errands here on Arrakis."
    "Why not?" Alia demanded. "He's her lover -- in his dreams if not in fact."
    "Yes, of course." And he wondered that she did not hear the insincerity in his voice.
    "When will you abduct her?" Alia asked. 
    "It's better that you don't know." 
    "Yes . . . yes, I see. Where'll you take her?" 
    "Where she cannot be found. Depend upon it; she won't be left here to threaten you."
    The glee in Alia's eyes could not be mistaken. "But where will . . ."
    "If you do not know, then you can answer before a Truthsayer, if necessary, that you do not know where she is." 
    "Ahhh, clever, Duncan."
    Now she believes I will kill the Lady Jessica, he thought. And he said: "Goodbye, beloved."
    She did not hear the finality in his voice, even kissed him lightly as he left.
    And all the way down through the sietchlike maze of Temple corridors, Idaho brushed at his eyes. Tleilaxu eyes were not immune to tears.

= = = = = =

You have loved Caladan 
And lamented its lost host -- 
But pain discovers 
New lovers cannot erase 
Those forever ghost.
-Refrain from The Habbanya Lament

    Stilgar quadrupled the sietch guard around the twins, but he knew it was useless. The lad was like his Atreides namesake, the grandfather Leto. Everyone who'd known the original Duke remarked on it. Leto had the measuring look about him, and caution, yes, but all of it had to be evaluated against that latent wildness, the susceptibility to dangerous decisions.
    Ghanima was more like her mother. There was Chani's red hair, the set of Chani's eyes, and a calculating way about her when she adjusted to difficulties. She often said that she only did what she had to do, but where Leto led she would follow. 
    And Leto was going to lead them into danger.
    Not once did Stilgar think of taking his problem to Alia. That ruled out Irulan, who ran to Alia with anything and everything. In coming to his decision, Stilgar realized he had accepted the possibility that Leto judged Alia correctly.
    She uses people in a casual and callous way, he thought. She even uses Duncan that way. It isn't so much that she'd turn on me and kill me. She'd discard me.
    Meanwhile the guard was strengthened and Stilgar stalked his sietch like a robed specter, prying everywhere. All the time, his mind seethed with the doubts Leto had planted there. If one could not depend upon tradition, then where was the rock upon which to anchor his life?
    On the afternoon of the Convocation of Welcome for the Lady Jessica, Stilgar spied Ghanima standing with her grandmother at the entrance lip to the sietch's great assembly chamber. It was early and Alia had not yet arrived, but people already were thronging into the chamber, casting surreptitious glances at the child and adult as they passed.
    Stilgar paused in a shadowed alcove out of the crowd flow and watched the pair of them, unable to hear their words above the murmuring throb of an assembling multitude. The people of many tribes would be here today to welcome back their old Reverend Mother. But he stared at Ghanima. Her eyes, the way they danced when she spoke! The movement fascinated him. Those deep blue, steady, demanding, measuring eyes. And that way of throwing her red-gold hair off her shoulder with a twist of the head: that was Chani. It was a ghostly resurrection, an uncanny resemblance.
    Slowly Stilgar drew closer and took up his station in another alcove.
    He could not associate Ghanima's observing manner with any other child of his experience -- except her brother. Where was Leto? Stilgar glanced back up the crowded passage. His guards would have spread an alarm if anything were amiss. He shook his head. These twins assaulted his sanity. They were a constant abrasion against his peace of mind. He could almost hate them. Kin were not immune from one's hatred, but blood (and its precious water) carried demands for one's countenance which transcended most other concerns. These twins existed as his greatest responsibility.
    Dust-filtered brown light came from the cavernous assembly chamber beyond Ghanima and Jessica. It touched the child's shoulders and the new white robe she wore, backlighting her hair as she turned to peer into the passage at the people thronging past.
    Why did Leto afflict me with these doubts? he wondered. There was no doubt that it had been done deliberately. Perhaps Leto wanted me to have a small share of his own mental experience. Stilgar knew why the twins were different, but had always found his reasoning processes unable to accept what he knew. He had never experienced the womb as prison to an awakened consciousness -- a living awareness from the second month of gestation, so it was said.
    Leto had once said that his memory was like "an internal holograph, expanding in size and in detail from that original shocked awakening, but never changing shape or outline." 
    For the first time, as he watched Ghanima and the Lady Jessica, Stilgar began to understand what it must be like to live in such a scrambled web of memories, unable to retreat or find a sealed room of the mind. Faced with such a condition, one had to integrate madness, to select and reject from a multitude of offerings in a system where answers changed as fast as the question.
    There could be no fixed tradition. There could be no absolute answers to double-faced questions. What works? That which does not work. What does not work? That which works. He recognized this pattern. It was the old Fremen game of riddles. Question: "It brings death and life." Answer: "The Coriolis wind." 
    Why did Leto want me to understand this? Stilgar asked himself. From his cautious probings, Stilgar knew that the twins shared a common view of their difference: they thought of it as affliction. The birth canal would be a draining place to such a one, he thought. Ignorance reduces the shock of some experiences, but they would have no ignorance about birth. What would it be like to live a life where you knew all of the things that could go wrong? You would face a constant war with doubts. You would resent your difference from your fellows. It would be pleasant to inflict others with even a taste of that difference. "Why me?" would be your first unanswered question.
    And what have I been asking myself? Stilgar thought. A wry smile touched his lips. Why me?
    Seeing the twins in this new way, he understood the dangerous chances they took with their uncompleted bodies. Ghanima had put it to him succinctly once after he'd berated her for climbing the precipitous west face to the rim above Sietch Tabr.
    "Why should I fear death? I've been there before -- many times."
    How can I presume to teach such children? Stilgar wondered. How can anyone presume?

    Oddly, Jessica's thoughts were moving in a similar vein as she talked to her granddaughter. She'd been thinking how difficult it must be to carry mature minds in immature bodies. The body would have to learn what the mind already knew it could do -- aligning responses and reflexes. The old Bene Gesserit prana-bindu regimen would be available to them, but even there the mind would run where the flesh could not. Gurney had a supremely difficult task carrying out her orders.
    "Stilgar is watching us from an alcove back there," Ghanima said.
    Jessica did not turn. But she found herself confounded by what she heard in Ghanima's voice. Ghanima loved the old Fremen as one would love a parent. Even while she spoke lightly of him and teased him, she loved him. The realization forced Jessica to see the old Naib in a new light, understanding in a gestalten revelation what the twins and Stilgar shared. This new Arrakis did not fit Stilgar well, Jessica realized. No more than this new universe fitted her grandchildren.
    Unwanted and undemanded, a Bene Gesserit saying flowed through Jessica's mind: "To suspect your own mortality is to know the beginning of terror; to learn irrefutably that you are mortal is to know the end of terror."
    Yes, death would not be a hard yoke to wear, but life was a slow fire to Stilgar and the twins. Each found an ill fitting world and longed for other ways where variations might be known without threat. They were children of Abraham, learning more from a hawk stooping over the desert than from any book yet written.
    Leto had confounded Jessica only that morning as they'd stood beside the qanat which flowed below the sietch. He'd said: "Water traps us, grandmother. We'd be better off living like dust because then the wind could carry us higher than the highest cliffs of the Shield Wall."
    Although she was familiar with such devious maturity from the mouths of these children, Jessica had been caught by this utterance, but had managed: "Your father might've said that." 
    And Leto, throwing a handful of sand into the air to watch it fall: "Yes, he might've. But my father did not consider then how quickly water makes everything fall back to the ground from which it came."
    Now, standing beside Ghanima in the sietch, Jessica felt the shock of those words anew. She turned, glanced back at the still-flowing throng, let her gaze wander across Stilgar's shadowy shape in the alcove. Stilgar was no tame Fremen, trained only to carry twigs to the nest. He was still a hawk. When he thought of the color red, he did not think of flowers but of blood.
    "You're so quiet, suddenly," Ghanima said. "Is something wrong?"
    Jessica shook her head. "It's something Leto said this morning, that's all." 
    "When you went out to the plantings? What'd he say?" 
    Jessica thought of the curious look of adult wisdom which had come over Leto's face out there in the morning. It was the same look which came over Ghanima's face right now. "He was recalling the time when Gurney came back from the smugglers to the Atreides banner," Jessica said.
    "Then you were talking about Stilgar," Ghanima said.
    Jessica did not question how this insight occurred. The twins appeared capable of reproducing each other's thought trains at will.
    "Yes, we were," Jessica said. "Stilgar didn't like to hear Gurney calling . . . Paul his Duke, but Gurney's presence forced this upon all of the Fremen. Gurney kept saying 'My Duke.' " 
    "I see," Ghanima said. "And of course, Leto observed that he was not yet Stilgar's Duke."
    "That's right."
    "You know what he was doing to you, of course," Ghanima said.
    "I'm not sure I do," Jessica admitted, and she found this admission particularly disturbing because it had not occurred to her that Leto was doing anything at all to her.
    "He was trying to ignite your memories of our father," Ghanima said. "Leto's always hungry to know our father from the viewpoints of others who knew him." 
    "But . . . doesn't Leto have . . ."
    "Oh, he can listen to the inner life. Certainly. But that's not the same. You spoke about him, of course. Our father, I mean. You spoke of him as your son."
    "Yes." Jessica clipped it off. She did not like the feeling that these twins could turn her on and off at will, open her memories for observation, touch any emotion which attracted their interest. Ghanima might be doing that right now!
    "Leto said something to disturb you," Ghanima said.
    Jessica found herself shocked at the necessity to suppress anger. "Yes . . . he did."
    "You don't like the fact that he knows our father as our mother knew him, and knows our mother as our father knew her," Ghanima said. "You don't like what that implies -- what we may know about you."
    "I'd never really thought about it that way before," Jessica said, finding her voice stiff.
    "It's the knowledge of sensual things which usually disturbs," Ghanima said. "It's your conditioning. You find it extremely difficult to think of us as anything but children. But there's nothing our parents did together, in public or in private, that we would not know."
    For a brief instant Jessica found herself returning to the reaction which had come over her out there beside the qanat, but now she focused that reaction upon Ghanima.
    "He probably spoke of your Duke's 'rutting sensuality,' " Ghanima said. "Sometimes Leto needs a bridle on his mouth!" 
    Is there nothing these twins cannot profane? Jessica wondered, moving from shock to outrage to revulsion. How dared they speak of her Leto's sensuality? Of course a man and woman who loved each other would share the pleasure of their bodies! It was a private and beautiful thing, not to be paraded in casual conversation between a child and an adult.
    Child and adult!
    Abruptly Jessica realized that neither Leto nor Ghanima had done this casually. 
    As Jessica remained silent, Ghanima said: "We've shocked you. I apologize for both of us. Knowing Leto, I know he didn't consider apologizing. Sometimes when he's following a particular scent, he forgets how different we are . . . from you, for instance."
    Jessica thought: And that is why you both do this, of course. You are teaching me! And she wondered then: Who else are you teaching? Stilgar? Duncan?
    "Leto tries to see things as you see them," Ghanima said. "Memories are not enough. When you try the hardest, just then, you most often fail." 
    Jessica sighed.
    Ghanima touched her grandmother's arm. "Your son left many things unsaid which yet must be said, even to you. Forgive us, but he loved you. Don't you know that?" 
    Jessica turned away to hide the tears glistening in her eyes.
    "He knew your fears," Ghanima said. "Just as he knew Stilgar's fears. Dear Stil. Our father was his 'Doctor of Beasts' and Stil was no more than the green snail hidden in its shell." She hummed the tune from which she'd taken these words. The music hurled the lyrics against Jessica's awareness without compromise:

"O Doctor of Beasts, 
To a green snail shell 
With its timid miracle 
Hidden, awaiting death, 
You come as a deity! 
Even snails know 
That gods obliterate, 
And cures bring pain, 
That heaven is seen 
Through a door of flame. 
O Doctor of Beasts, 
I am the man-snail 
Who sees your single eye 
Peering into my shell!
Why, Muad'Dib? Why?"

    Ghanima said: "Unfortunately, our father left many man-snails in our universe."

= = = = = =

The assumption that humans exist within an essentially impermanent universe, taken as an operational precept, demands that the intellect become a totally aware balancing instrument. But the intellect cannot react thus without involving the entire organism. Such an organism may be recognized by its burning, driving behavior. And thus it is with a society treated as organism. But here we encounter an old inertia. Societies move to the goading of ancient, reactive impulses. They demand permanence. Any attempt to display the universe of impermanence arouses rejection patterns, fear, anger, and despair. Then how do we explain the acceptance of prescience? Simply: the giver of prescient visions, because he speaks of an absolute (permanent) realization, may be greeted with joy by humankind even while predicting the most dire events.
-The Book of Leto, After Harq al-Ada

    "It's liking fighting in the dark," Alia said.
    She paced the Council Chamber in angry strides, moving from the tall silvery draperies which softened the morning sun at the eastern windows to the divans grouped beneath decorated wall panels at the room's opposite end. Her sandals crossed spice-fiber rugs, parquet wood, tiles of giant garnet and once more, rugs. At last she stood over Irulan and Idaho, who sat facing each other on divans of grey whale fur.
    Idaho had resisted returning from Tabr, but she had sent peremptory orders. The abduction of Jessica was more important than ever now, but it had to wait. Idaho's mentat perceptions were required.
    "These things are cut from the same pattern," Alia said. "They stink of a far-reaching plot."
    "Perhaps not," Irulan ventured, but she glanced questioningly at Idaho.
    Alia's face lapsed into an undisguised sneer. How could Irulan be that innocent? Unless . . . Alia bent a sharp and questioning stare onto the Princess. Irulan wore a simple black aba robe which matched the shadows in her spice-indigo eyes. Her blonde hair was tied in a tight coil at the nape of her neck, accenting a face thinned and toughened by years on Arrakis. She still retained the haughtiness she'd learned in the court of her father, Shaddam IV, and Alia often felt that this prideful attitude could mask the thoughts of a conspirator.
    Idaho lounged in the black-and-green uniform of an Atreides House Guard, no insignia. It was an affectation which was secretly resented by many of Alia's actual guards, especially the amazons, who gloried in insignia of office. They did not like the plain presence of the ghola-swordmaster-mentat, the more so because he was the husband of their mistress.
    "So the tribes want the Lady Jessica reinstated into the Regency Council," Idaho said. "How can that --" 
    "They make unanimous demand!" Alia said, pointing to an embossed sheet of spice-paper on the divan beside Irulan. "Farad'n is one thing, but this . . . this has the stink of other alignments!" 
    "What does Stilgar think?" Irulan asked. 
    "His signature's on that paper!" Alia said. 
    "But if he . . ." 
    "How could he deny the mother of his god?" Alia sneered.
    Idaho looked up at her, thinking: That's awfully close to the edge with Irulan! Again he wondered why Alia had brought him back here when she knew that he was needed at Sietch Tabr if the abduction plot were to be carried off. Was it possible she'd heard about the message sent to him by The Preacher? This thought filled his breast with turmoil. How could that mendicant mystic know the secret signal by which Paul Atreides had always summoned his swordmaster? Idaho longed to leave this pointless meeting and return to the search for an answer to that question.
    "There's no doubt that The Preacher has been off-planet," Alia said. "The Guild wouldn't dare deceive us in such a thing. I will have him --" 
    "Careful!" Irulan said.
    "Indeed, have a care," Idaho said. "Half the planet believe him to be --" He shrugged. "-- your brother." And Idaho hoped he had carried this off with a properly casual attitude. How had the man known that signal?
    "But if he's a courier, or a spy of the --"
    "He's made contact with no one from CHOAM or House Corrino," Irulan said. "We can be sure of --"
    "We can be sure of nothing!" Alia did not try to hide her scorn. She turned her back on Irulan, faced Idaho. He knew why he was here! Why didn't he perform as expected? He was in Council because Irulan was here. The history which had brought a Princess of House Corrino into the Atreides fold could never be forgotten. Allegiance, once changed, could change again. Duncan's mentat powers should be searching for flaws, for subtle deviations in Irulan's behavior.
    Idaho stirred, glanced at Irulan. There were times when he resented the straight-line necessities imposed on mentat performance. He knew what Alia was thinking. Irulan would know it as well. But this Princess-wife to Paul Muad'Dib had overcome the decisions which had made her less than the royal concubine, Chani. There could be no doubt of Irulan's devotion to the royal twins. She had renounced family and Bene Gesserit in dedication to the Atreides.
    "My mother is part of this plot!" Alia insisted. "For what other reason would the Sisterhood send her back here at a time such as this?" 
    "Hysteria isn't going to help us," Idaho said.
    Alia whirled away from him, as he'd known she would. It helped him that he did not have to look at that once-beloved face which was now so twisted by alien possession.
    "Well," Irulan said, "the Guild can't be completely trusted for --" 
    "The Guild!" Alia sneered.
    "We can't rule out the enmity of the Guild or the Bene Gesserit," Idaho said. "But we must assign them special categories as essentially passive combatants. The Guild will live up to its basic rule: Never Govern. They're a parasitic growth, and they know it. They won't do anything to kill the organism which keeps them alive."
    "Their idea of which organism keeps them alive may be different from ours," Irulan drawled. It was the closest she ever came to a sneer, that lazy tone of voice which said: "You missed a point, mentat."
    Alia appeared puzzled. She had not expected Irulan to take this tack. It was not the kind of view which a conspirator would want examined.
    "No doubt," Idaho said. "But the Guild won't come out overtly against House Atreides. The Sisterhood, on the other hand, might risk a certain kind of political break which --" 
    "If they do, it'll be through a front: someone or some group they can disavow," Irulan said. "The Bene Gesserit haven't existed all of these centuries without knowing the value of self-effacement. They prefer being behind the throne, not on it." 
    Self-effacement? Alia wondered. Was that Irulan's choice?
    "Precisely the point I make about the Guild," Idaho said. He found the necessities of argument and explanation helpful. They kept his mind from other problems.
    Alia strode back toward the sunlit windows. She knew Idaho's blind spot; every mentat had it. They had to make pronouncements. This brought about a tendency to depend upon absolutes, to see finite limits. They knew this about themselves. It was part of their training. Yet they continued to act beyond self-limiting parameters. I should've left him at Sietch Tabr, Alia thought. It would've been better to just turn Irulan over to Javid for questioning. 
    Within her skull, Alia heard a rumbling voice: "Exactly!" 
    Shut up! Shut up! Shut up! she thought. A dangerous mistake beckoned her in these moments and she could not recognize its outlines. All she could sense was the danger. Idaho had to help her out of this predicament. He was a mentat. Mentats were necessary. The human-computer replaced the mechanical devices destroyed by the Butlerian Jihad. Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind! But Alia longed now for a compliant machine. They could not have suffered from Idaho's limitations. You could never distrust a machine.
    Alia heard Irulan's drawling voice.
    "A feint within a feint within a feint within a feint," Irulan said. "We all know the accepted pattern of attack upon power. I don't blame Alia for her suspicions. Of course she suspects everyone -- even us. Ignore that for the moment, though. What remains as the prime arena of motives, the most fertile source of danger to the Regency?" 
    "CHOAM," Idaho said, his voice mentat-flat.
    Alia allowed herself a grim smile. The Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles! But House Atreides dominated CHOAM with fifty-one percent of its shares. The Priesthood of Muad'Dib held another five percent, pragmatic acceptance by the Great Houses that Dune controlled the priceless melange. Not without reason was the spice often called "the secret coinage." Without melange, the Spacing Guild's heighliners could not move. Melange precipitated the "navigation trance" by which a translight pathway could be "seen" before it was traveled. Without melange and its amplification of the human immunogenic system, life expectancy for the very rich degenerated by a factor of at least four. Even the vast middle class of the Imperium ate diluted melange in small sprinklings with at least one meal a day.
    But Alia had heard the mentat sincerity in Idaho's voice, a sound which she'd been awaiting with terrible expectancy.
    CHOAM. The Combine Honnete was much more than House Atreides, much more than Dune, much more than the Priesthood or melange. It was inkvines, whale fur, shigawire, Ixian artifacts and entertainers, trade in people and places, the Hajj, those products which came from the borderline legality of Tleilaxu technology; it was addictive drugs and medical techniques; it was transportation (the Guild) and all of the supercomplex commerce of an empire which encompassed thousands of known planets plus some which fed secretly at the fringes, permitted there for services rendered. When Idaho said CHOAM, he spoke of a constant ferment, intrigue within intrigue, a play of powers where the shift of one duodecimal point in interest payments could change the ownership of an entire planet.
    Alia returned to stand over the two seated on the divans. "Something specific about CHOAM bothers you?" she asked.
    "There's always the heavy speculative stockpiling of spice by certain Houses," Irulan said.
    Alia slapped her hands against her own thighs, then gestured at the embossed spice-paper beside Irulan. "That demand doesn't intrigue you, coming as it does --"
    "All right!" Idaho barked. "Out with it. What're you withholding? You know better than to deny the data and still expect me to function as --"
    "There has been a recent very significant increase in trade for people with four specific specialties," Alia said. And she wondered if this would be truly new information for this pair. "Which specialties?" Irulan asked.
    "Swordmasters, twisted mentats from Tleilax, conditioned medics from the Suk school, and fincap accountants, most especially the latter. Why would questionable bookkeeping be in demand right now?" She directed the question at Idaho.
    Function as a mentat he thought. Well, that was better than dwelling on what Alia had become. He focused on her words, replaying them in his mind mentat fashion. Swordmasters? That had been his own calling once. Swordmasters were, of course, more than personal fighters. They could repair force shields, plan military campaigns, design military support facilities, improvise weapons. Twisted mentats? The Tleilaxu persisted in this hoax, obviously. As a mentat himself, Idaho knew the fragile insecurity of Tleilaxu twisting. Great Houses which bought such mentats hoped to control them absolutely. Impossible! Even Piter de Vries, who'd served the Harkonnens in their assault on House Atreides, had maintained his own essential dignity, accepting death rather than surrender his inner core of selfdom at the end. Suk doctors? Their conditioning supposedly guaranteed them against disloyalty to their owner-patients. Suk doctors came very expensive. Increased purchase of Suks would involve substantial exchanges of funds.
    Idaho weighed these facts against an increase in fincap accountants.
    "Prime computation," he said, indicating a heavily weighted assurance that he spoke of inductive fact. "There's been a recent increase in wealth among Houses Minor. Some have to be moving quietly toward Great House status. Such wealth could only come from some specific shifts in political alignments." 
    "We come at last to the Landsraad," Alia said, voicing her own belief.
    "The next Landsraad session is almost two standard years away," Irulan reminded her.
    "But political bargaining never ceases," Alia said. "And I'll warrant some among those tribal signatories --" She gestured at the paper beside Irulan. "-- are among the Houses Minor who've shifted their alignment." 
    "Perhaps," Irulan said.
    "The Landsraad," Alia said. "What better front for the Bene Gesserits? And what better agent for the Sisterhood than my own mother?" Alia planted herself directly in front of Idaho. "Well, Duncan?"
    Why not function as a mentat? Idaho asked himself. He saw the tenor of Alia's suspicions now. After all, Duncan Idaho had been personal house guard to the Lady Jessica for many years. 
    "Duncan?" Alia pressed.
    "You should inquire closely after any advisory legislation which may be under preparation for the next session of the Landsraad," Idaho said. "They might take the legal position that a Regency can't veto certain kinds of legislation -- specifically, adjustments of taxation and the policing of cartels. There are others, but . . ."
    "Not a very good pragmatic bet on their part if they take that position," Irulan said.
    "I agree," Alia said. "The Sardaukar have no teeth and we still have our Fremen legions."
    "Careful, Alia," Idaho said. "Our enemies would like nothing better than to make us appear monstrous. No matter how many legions you command, power ultimately rides on popular sufferance in an empire as scattered as this one." 
    "Popular sufferance?" Irulan asked.
    "You mean Great House sufferance," Alia said.
    "And how many Great Houses will we face under this new alliance?" Idaho asked. "Money is collecting in strange places!" 
    "The fringes?" Irulan asked.
    Idaho shrugged. It was an unanswerable question. All of them suspected that one day the Tleilaxu or technological tinkerers on the Imperial fringes would nullify the Holtzmann Effect. On that day, shields would be useless. The whole precarious balance which maintained planetary feudatories would collapse.
    Alia refused to consider that possibility. "We'll ride with what we have," she said. "And what we have is a certain knowledge throughout the CHOAM directorate that we can destroy the spice if they force us to it. They won't risk that." 
    "Back to CHOAM again," Irulan said.
    "Unless someone has managed to duplicate the sandtrout-sandworm cycle on another planet," Idaho said. He looked speculatively at Irulan, excited by this question. "Salusa Secundus?"
    "My contacts there remain reliable," Irulan said. "Not Salusa."
    "Then my answer stands," Alia said, staring at Idaho. "We ride with what we have."
    My move, Idaho thought. He said: "Why'd you drag me away from important work? You could've worked this out yourself." 
    "Don't take that tone with me!" Alia snapped.
    Idaho's eyes went wide. For an instant, he'd seen the alien on Alia's face, and it was a disconcerting sight. He turned his attention to Irulan, but she had not seen -- or gave that appearance.
    "I don't need an elementary education," Alia said, her voice still edged with alien anger.
    Idaho managed a rueful smile, but his breast ached.
    "We never get far from wealth and all of its masks when we deal with power," Irulan drawled. "Paul was a social mutation and, as such, we have to remember that he shifted the old balance of wealth."
    "Such mutations are not irreversible," Alia said, turning away from them as though she'd not exposed her terrible difference. "Wherever there's wealth in this empire, they know this." 
    "They also know," Irulan said, "that there are three people who could perpetuate that mutation: the twins and . . ." She pointed at Alia.
    Are they insane, this pair? Idaho wondered. 
    "They will try to assassinate me!" Alia rasped.
    And Idaho sat in shocked silence, his mentat awareness whirling. Assassinate Alia? Why? They could discredit her too easily. They could cut her out of the Fremen pack and hunt her down at will. But the twins, now . . . He knew he was not in the proper mentat calm for such an assessment, but he had to try. He had to be as precise as possible. At the same time, he knew that precise thinking contained undigested absolutes. Nature was not precise. The universe was not precise when reduced to his scale; it was vague and fuzzy, full of unexpected movements and changes. Humankind as a whole had to be entered into this computation as a natural phenomenon. And the whole process of precise analysis represented a chopping off, a remove from the ongoing current of the universe. He had to get at that current, see it in motion.
    "We were right to focus on CHOAM and the Landsraad," Irulan drawled. "And Duncan's suggestion offers a first line of inquiry for --"
    "Money as a translation of energy can't be separated from the energy it expresses," Alia said. "We all know this. But we have to answer three specific questions: When? Using what weapons? Where?"
    The twins . . . the twins, Idaho thought. It's the twins who're in danger, not Alia.
    "You're not interested in who or how?" Irulan asked.
    "If House Corrino or CHOAM or any other group employs human instruments on this planet," Alia said, "we stand a better than sixty percent chance of finding them before they act. Knowing when they'll act and where gives us a bigger leverage on those odds. How? That's just asking what weapons?" 
    Why can't they see it as I see it? Idaho wondered. 
    "All right," Irulan said. "When?" 
    "When attention is focused on someone else," Alia said.
    "Attention was focused on your mother at the Convocation," Irulan said. "There was no attempt." 
    "Wrong place," Alia said.
    What is she doing? Idaho wondered. 
    "Where, then?" Irulan asked.
    "Right here in the Keep," Alia said. "It's the place where I'd feel most secure and least on my guard." 
    "What weapons?" Irulan asked.
    "Conventional -- something a Fremen might have on his person: poisoned crysknife, maula pistol, a --"
    "They've not tried a hunter-seeker in a long while," Irulan said.
    "Wouldn't work in a crowd," Alia said. "There'll have to be a crowd." 
    "Biological weapon?" Irulan asked.
    "An infectious agent?" Alia asked, not masking her incredulity. How could Irulan think an infectious agent would succeed against the immunological barriers which protected an Atreides?
    "I was thinking more in the line of some animal," Irulan said. "A small pet, say, trained to bite a specific victim, inflicting a poison with its bite." 
    "The House ferrets will prevent that," Alia said. 
    "One of them, then?" Irulan asked.
    "Couldn't be done. The House ferrets would reject an outsider, kill it. You know that." 
    "I was just exploring possibilities in the hope that --" 
    "I'll alert my guards," Alia said.
    As Alia said guards, Idaho put a hand over his Tleilaxu eyes, trying to prevent the demanding involvement which swept over him. It was Rhajia, the movement of Infinity as expressed by Life, the latent cup of total immersion in mentat awareness which lay in wait for every mentat. It threw his awareness onto the universe like a net, falling, defining the shapes within it. He saw the twins crouching in darkness while giant claws raked the air about them. 
    "No," he whispered.
    "What?" Alia looked at him as though surprised to find him still there.
He took his hand from his eyes.
    "The garments that House Corrino sent?" he asked. "Have they been sent on to the twins?" 
    "Of course," Irulan said. "They're perfectly safe." 
    "No one's going to try for the twins at Sietch Tabr," Alia said. "Not with all of those Stilgar-trained guards around." 
    Idaho stared at her. He had no particular datum to reinforce an argument based on mentat computation, but he knew. He knew. This thing he'd experienced came very close to the visionary power which Paul had known. Neither Irulan nor Alia would believe it, coming from him.
    "I'd like to alert the port authorities against allowing the importation of any outside animals," he said.
    "You're not taking Irulan's suggestion seriously," Alia protested.
    "Why take any chances?" he asked.
    "Tell that to the smugglers," Alia said. "I'll put my dependence on the House ferrets."
    Idaho shook his head. What could House ferrets do against claws the size of those he envisioned? But Alia was right. Bribes in the right places, one acquiescent Guild navigator, and anyplace in the Empty Quarter became a landing port. The Guild would resist a front position in any attack on House Atreides, but if the price were high enough . . . Well, the Guild could only be thought of as something like a geological barrier which made attacks difficult, but not impossible. They could always protest that they were just "a transportation agency." How could they know to what use a particular cargo would be put?
    Alia broke the silence with a purely Fremen gesture, a raised fist with thumb horizontal. She accompanied the gesture with a traditional expletive which meant, "I give Typhoon Conflict." She obviously saw herself as the only logical target for assassins, and the gesture protested a universe full of undigested threats. She was saying she would hurl the death wind at anyone who attacked her.
    Idaho felt the hopelessness of any protest. He saw that she no longer suspected him. He was going back to Tabr and she expected a perfectly executed abduction of the Lady Jessica. He lifted himself from the divan in an adrenaline surge of anger, thinking: If only Alia were the target! If only assassins could get to her! For an instant, he rested his hand on his own knife, but it was not in him to do this. Far better, though, that she die a martyr than live to be discredited and bounded into a sandy grave.
    "Yes," Alia said, misinterpreting his expression as concern for her. "You'd best hurry back to Tabr." And she thought: How foolish of me to suspect Duncan! He's mine, not Jessica's! It had been the demand from the tribes that'd upset her, Alia thought. She waved an airy goodbye to Idaho as he left.
    Idaho left the Council Chamber feeling hopeless. Not only was Alia blind with her alien possession, but she became more insane with each crisis. She'd already passed her danger point and was doomed. But what could be done for the twins? Whom could he convince? Stilgar? And what could Stilgar do that he wasn't already doing?
    The Lady Jessica, then?
    Yes, he'd explore that possibility -- but she, too, might be far gone in plotting with her Sisterhood. He carried few illusions about that Atreides concubine. She might do anything at the command of the Bene Gesserits -- even turn against her own grandchildren.

= = = = = =

Good government never depends upon laws, but upon the personal qualities of those who govern. The machinery of government is always subordinate to the will of those who administer that machinery. The most important element of government, therefore, is the method of choosing leaders.
-Law and Governance, The Spacing Guild Manual

    Why does Alia wish me to share the morning audience? Jessica wondered. They've not voted me back into the Council.
    Jessica stood in the anteroom to the Keep's Great Hall. The anteroom itself would have been a great hall anywhere other than Arrakis. Following the Atreides lead, buildings in Arrakeen had become ever more gigantic as wealth and power concentrated, and this room epitomized her misgivings. She did not like this anteroom with its tiled floor depicting her son's victory over Shaddam IV.
    She caught a reflection of her own face in the polished plasteel door which led into the Great Hall. Returning to Dune forced such comparisons upon her, and Jessica noted only the signs of aging in her own features: the oval face had developed tiny lines and the eyes were more brittle in their indigo reflection. She could remember when there had been white around the blue of her eyes. Only the careful ministrations of a professional dresser maintained the polished bronze of her hair. Her nose remained small, mouth generous, and her body was still slender, but even the Bene Gesserit-trained muscles had a tendency toward slowing with the passage of time. Some might not note this and say: "You haven't changed a bit!" But the Sisterhood's training was a two-edged sword; small changes seldom escaped the notice of people thus trained.
    And the lack of small changes in Alia had not escaped Jessica's notice.
    Javid, the master of Alia's appointments, stood at the great door, being very official this morning. He was a robed genie with a cynical smile on his round face. Javid struck Jessica as a paradox: a well-fed Fremen. Noting her attention upon him, Javid smiled knowingly, shrugged. His attendance in Jessica's entourage had been short, as he'd known it would be. He hated Atreides, but he was Alia's man in more ways than one, if the rumors were to be believed,
    Jessica saw the shrug, thought: This is the age of the shrug. He knows I've heard all the stories about him and he doesn't care. Our civilization could well die of indifference within it before succumbing to external attack.
    The guards Gurney had assigned her before leaving for the smugglers and the desert hadn't liked her coming here without their attendance. But Jessica felt oddly safe. Let someone make a martyr of her in this place; Alia wouldn't survive it. Alia would know that.
    When Jessica failed to respond to his shrug and smile, Javid coughed, a belching disturbance of his larynx which could only have been achieved with practice. It was like a secret language. It said: "We understand the nonsense of all this pomp, My Lady. Isn't it wonderful what humans can be made to believe!" 
    Wonderful! Jessica agreed, but her face gave no indication of the thought.
    The anteroom was quite full now, all of the morning's permitted supplicants having received their right of entrance from Javid's people. The outer doors had been closed. Supplicants and attendants kept a polite distance from Jessica, but observed that she wore the formal black aba of a Fremen Reverend Mother. This would raise many questions. No mark of Muad'Dib's priesthood could be seen on her person. Conversations hummed as the people divided their attention between Jessica and the small side door through which Alia would come to lead them into the Great Hall. It was obvious to Jessica that the old pattern which defined where the Regency's powers lay had been shaken.
    I did that just by coming here, she thought. But I came because Alia invited me.
    Reading the signs of disturbance, Jessica realized Alia was deliberately prolonging this moment, allowing the subtle currents to run their course here. Alia would be watching from a spy hole, of course. Few subtleties of Alia's behavior escaped Jessica, and she felt with each passing minute how right she'd been to accept the mission which the Sisterhood had pressed upon her.
    "Matters cannot be allowed to continue in this way," the leader of the Bene Gesserit delegation had argued. "Surely the signs of decay have not escaped you -- you of all people! We know why you left us, but we know also how you were trained. Nothing was stinted in your education. You are an adept of the Panoplia Prophetica and you must know when the souring of a powerful religion threatens us all."
    Jessica had pursed her lips in thought while staring out a window at the soft signs of spring at Castle Caladan. She did not like to direct her thinking in such a logical fashion. One of the first lessons of the Sisterhood had been to reserve an attitude of questioning distrust for anything which came in the guise of logic. But the members of the delegation had known that, too.
    How moist the air had been that morning, Jessica thought, looking around Alia's anteroom. How fresh and moist. Here there was a sweaty dampness to the air which evoked a sense of uneasiness in Jessica, and she thought: I've reverted to Fremen ways. The air was too moist in this sietch-above-ground. What was wrong with the Master of the Stills? Paul would never have permitted such laxness.
    She noted that Javid, his shiny face alert and composed, appeared not to have noticed the fault of dampness in the anteroom's air. Bad training for one born on Arrakis.
    The members of the Bene Gesserit delegation had wanted to know if she required proofs of their allegations. She'd given them an angry answer out of their own manuals: "All proofs inevitably lead to propositions which have no proof! All things are known because we want to believe in them."
    "But we have submitted these questions to mentats," the delegation's leader had protested.
    Jessica had stared at the woman, astonished. "I marvel that you have reached your present station and not yet learned the limits of mentats," Jessica had said.
    At which the delegation had relaxed. Apparently it had all been a test, and she had passed. They'd feared, of course, that she had lost all touch with those balancing abilities which were at the core of Bene Gesserit training.
    Now Jessica became softly alert as Javid left his door station and approached her. He bowed. "My Lady. It occurred to me that you might not've heard the latest exploit of The Preacher." 
    "I get daily reports on everything which occurs here," Jessica said. Let him take that back to Alia!
    Javid smiled. "Then you know he rails against your family. Only last night, he preached in the south suburb and no one dared touch him. You know why, of course."
    "Because they think he's my son come back to them," Jessica said, her voice bored.
    "This question has not yet been put to the mentat Idaho," Javid said. "Perhaps that should be done and the thing settled." 
    Jessica thought: Here's one who truly doesn't know a mentat's limits, although he dares put horns on one -- in his dreams if not in fact.
    "Mentats share the fallibilities of those who use them," she said. "The human mind, as is the case with the mind of any animal, is a resonator. It responds to resonances in the environment. The mentat has learned to extend his awareness across many parallel loops of causality and to proceed along those loops for long chains of consequences." Let him chew on that!
    "This Preacher doesn't disturb you, then?" Javid asked, his voice abruptly formal and portentous.
    "I find him a healthy sign," she said. "I don't want him bothered."
    Javid clearly had not expected that blunt a response. He tried to smile, failed. Then: "The ruling Council of the church which deifies thy son will, of course, bow to your wishes if you insist. But certainly some explanation --"
    "Perhaps you'd rather I explained how I fit into your schemes," she said.
    Javid stared at her narrowly. "Madame, I see no logical reason why thou refusest to denounce this Preacher. He cannot be thy son. I make a reasonable request: denounce him." 
    This is a set piece, Jessica thought. Alia put him up to it. 
    She said: "No."
    "But he defiles the name of thy son! He preaches abominable things, cries out against thy holy daughter. He incites the populace against us. When asked, he said that even thou possessest the nature of evil and that thy --"
    "Enough of this nonsense!" Jessica said. "Tell Alia that I refuse. I've heard nothing but tales of this Preacher since returning. He bores me."
    "Does it bore thee, Madame, to learn that in his latest defilement he has said that thou wilt not turn against him? And here, clearly, thou --" 
    "Evil as I am, I still won't denounce him," she said. 
    "It is no joking matter, Madame!"
    Jessica waved him away angrily. "Begone!" She spoke with sufficient carrying power that others heard, forcing him to obey.
    His eyes glared with rage, but he managed a stiff bow and returned to his position at the door.
    This argument fitted neatly into the observations Jessica already had made. When he spoke of Alia, Javid's voice carried the husky undertones of a lover; no mistaking it. The rumors no doubt were true. Alia had allowed her life to degenerate in a terrible way. Observing this, Jessica began to harbor the suspicion that Alia was a willing participant in Abomination. Was it a perverse will to self-destruction? Because surely Alia was working to destroy herself and the power base which fed on her brother's teachings.
    Faint stirrings of unease began to grow apparent in the anteroom. The aficionados of this place would know when Alia delayed too long, and by now they'd all heard about Jessica's peremptory dismissal of Alia's favorite.
    Jessica sighed. She felt that her body had walked into this place with her soul creeping behind. Movements among the courtiers were so transparent! The seeking out of important people was a dance like the wind through a field of cereal stalks. The cultivated inhabitants of this place furrowed their brows and gave pragmatic rating numbers to the importance of each of their fellows. Obviously her rebuff of Javid had hurt him; few spoke to him now. But the others! Her trained eye could read the rating numbers in the satellites attending the powerful.
    They do not attend me because I am dangerous, she thought. I have the stink of someone Alia fears.
    Jessica glanced around the room, seeing eyes turn away. They were such seriously futile people that she found herself wanting to cry out against their ready-made justifications for pointless lives. Oh, if only The Preacher could see this room as it looked now!
    A fragment of a nearby conversation caught her attention. A tall, slender Priest was addressing his coterie, no doubt supplicants here under his auspices. "Often I must speak otherwise than I think," he said. "This is called diplomacy."
    The resultant laughter was too loud, too quickly silenced. People in the group saw that Jessica had overheard.
    My Duke would have transported such a one to the farthest available hellhole! Jessica thought. I've returned none too soon.
    She knew now that she'd lived on faraway Caladan in an insulated capsule which had allowed only the most blatant of Alia's excesses to intrude. I contributed to my own dream-existence, she thought. Caladan had been something like that insulation provided by a really first-class frigate riding securely in the hold of a Guild heighliner. Only the most violent maneuvers could be felt, and those as mere softened movements.
    How seductive it is to live in peace, she thought.
    The more she saw of Alia's court, the more sympathy Jessica felt for the words reported as coming from this blind Preacher. Yes, Paul might have said such words on seeing what had become of his realm. And Jessica wondered what Gurney had found out among the smugglers.
    Her first reaction to Arrakeen had been the right one, Jessica realized. On that first ride into the city with Javid, her attention had been caught by armored screens around dwellings, the heavily guarded pathways and alleys, the patient watchers at every turn, the tall walls and indications of deep underground places revealed by thick foundations. Arrakeen had become an ungenerous place, a contained place, unreasonable and self-righteous in its harsh outlines.
    Abruptly the anteroom's small side door opened. A vanguard of priestess amazons spewed into the room with Alia shielded behind them, haughty and moving with a confined awareness of real and terrible power. Alia's face was composed; no emotion betrayed itself as her gaze caught and held her mother's. But both knew the battle had been joined.
    At Javid's command, the giant doors into the great Hall were opened, moving with a silent and inevitable sense of hidden energies.
    Alia came to her mother's side as the guards enfolded them. 
    "Shall we go in now, mother?" Alia asked.
    "It's high time," Jessica said. And she thought, seeing the sense of gloating in Alia's eyes: She thinks she can destroy me and remain unscathed! She's mad!
    And Jessica wondered if that might not have been what Idaho had wanted. He'd sent a message, but she'd been unable to respond. Such an enigmatic message: "Danger. Must see you." It had been written in a variant of the old Chakobsa where the particular word chosen to denote danger signified a plot.
    I'll see him immediately when I return to Tabr, she thought.

= = = = = =

This is the fallacy of power: ultimately it is effective only in an absolute, a limited universe. But the basic lesson of our relativistic universe is that things change. Any power must always meet a greater power. Paul Muad'Dib taught this lesson to the Sardaukar on the Plains of Arrakeen. His descendants have yet to learn the lesson for themselves.
-The Preacher at Arrakeen

    The first supplicant for the morning audience was a Kadeshian troubadour, a pilgrim of the Hajj whose purse had been emptied by Arrakeen mercenaries. He stood on the water-green stone of the chamber floor with no air of begging about him.
    Jessica admired his boldness from where she sat with Alia atop the seven-step platform. Identical thrones had been placed here for mother and daughter, and Jessica made particular note of the fact that Alia sat on the right, the masculine position.
    As for the Kadeshian troubadour, it was obvious that Javid's people had passed him for just this quality he now displayed, his boldness. The troubadour was expected to provide some entertainment for the courtiers of the Great Hall; it was the payment he'd make in lieu of the money he no longer possessed.
    From the report of the Priest-Advocate who now pled the troubadour's case, the Kadeshian had retained only the clothing on his back and the baliset slung over one shoulder on a leather cord.
    "He says he was fed a dark drink," the Advocate said, barely hiding the smile which sought to twist his lips. "If it please your Holiness, the drink left him helpless but awake while his purse was cut,"
    Jessica studied the troubadour while the Advocate droned on and on with a false subservience, his voice full of mucky morals. The Kadeshian was tall, easily two meters. He had a roving eye which showed intelligent alertness and humor. His golden hair was worn to the shoulders in the style of his planet, and there was a sense of virile strength in the broad chest and neatly tapering body which a grey Hajj robe could not conceal. His name was given as Tagir Mohandis and he was descended from merchant engineers, proud of his ancestry and himself.
    Alia finally cut off the pleading with a hand wave, spoke without turning: "The Lady Jessica will render first judgment in honor of her return to us."
    "Thank you, daughter," Jessica said, staling the order of ascendancy to all who heard. Daughter! So this Tagir Mohandis was part of their plan. Or was he an innocent dupe? This judgment was designed to open attack on herself, Jessica realized. It was obvious in Alia's attitude.
    "Do you play that instrument well?" Jessica asked, indicating the nine-string baliset on the troubadour's shoulder.
    "As well as the Great Gurney Halleck himself!" Tagir Mohandis spoke loudly for all in the hall to hear, and his words evoked an interested stir among the courtiers.
    "You seek the gift of transport money," Jessica said. "Where would that money take you?"
    "To Salusa Secundus and Farad'n's court," Mohandis said. "I've heard he seeks troubadours and minstrels, that he supports the arts and builds a great renaissance of cultivated life around him." 
    Jessica refrained from glancing at Alia. They'd known, of course, what Mohandis would ask. She found herself enjoying this byplay. Did they think her unable to meet this thrust?
    "Will you play for your passage?" Jessica asked. "My terms are Fremen terms. If I enjoy your music, I may keep you here to smooth away my cares; if your music offends me, I may send you to toil in the desert for your passage money. If I deem your playing just right for Farad'n, who is said to be an enemy of the Atreides, then I will send you to him with my blessing. Will you play on these terms, Tagir Mohandis?"
    He threw his head back in a great roaring laugh. His blond hair danced as he unslung the baliset and tuned it deftly to indicate acceptance of her challenge.
    The crowd in the chamber started to press closer, but were held back by courtiers and guards.
    Presently Mohandis strummed a note, holding the bass hum of the side strings with a fine attention to their compelling vibration. Then, lifting his voice in a mellow tenor, he sang, obviously improvising, but his touch so deft that Jessica was enthralled before she focused on his lyrics:

"You say you long for Caladan seas, 
Where once you ruled, Atreides, 
Without surcease -- 
But exiles dwell in stranger-lands!

You say 'twere bitter, men so rude, 
To sell your dreams of Shai-Hulud, 
For tasteless food -- 
And exiles, dwell in stranger-lands.

You make Arrakis grow infirm, 
Silence the passage of the worm 
And end your term -- 
As exiles, dwell in stranger-lands.

Alia! They name you Coan-Teen, 
That spirit who is never seen 
Until --"

    "Enough!" Alia screamed. She pushed herself half out of her throne. "I'll have you --"
    "Alia!" Jessica spoke just loud enough, voice pitched just right to avoid confrontation while gaining full attention. It was a masterful use of Voice and all who heard it recognized the trained powers in this demonstration. Alia sank back into her seat and Jessica noted that she showed not the slightest discomfiture.
    This, too, was anticipated, Jessica thought. How very interesting.
    "The judgment on this first one is mine," Jessica reminded her.
    "Very well." Alia's words were barely audible.
    "I find this one a fitting gift for Farad'n," Jessica said. "He has a tongue which cuts like a crysknife. Such bloodletting as that tongue can administer would be healthy for our own court, but I'd rather he ministered to House Corrino." 
    A light rippling of laughter spread through the hall.
    Alia permitted herself a snorting exhalation. "Do you know what he called me?"
    "He didn't call you anything, daughter. He but reported that which he or anyone else could hear in the streets. There they call you Coan-Teen . . ."
    "The female death-spirit who walks without feet," Alia snarled.
    "If you put away those who report accurately, you'll keep only those who know what you want to hear," Jessica said, her voice sweet. "I can think of nothing more poisonous than to rot in the stink of your own reflections."
    Audible gasps came from those immediately below the thrones.
    Jessica focused on Mohandis, who remained silent, standing completely uncowed. He awaited whatever judgment was passed upon him as though it did not matter. Mohandis was exactly the kind of man her Duke would have chosen to have by his side in troubled times: one who acted with confidence of his own judgment, but accepted whatever befell, even death, without berating his fate. Then why had he chosen this course?
    "Why did you sing those particular words?" Jessica asked him.
    He lifted his head to speak clearly: "I'd heard that the Atreides were honorable and open-minded. I'd a thought to test it and perhaps to stay here in your service, thereby having the time to seek out those who robbed me and deal with them in my own fashion." 
    "He dares test us!" Alia muttered. 
    "Why not?" Jessica asked.
    She smiled down at the troubadour to signal goodwill. He had come into this hall only because it offered him opportunity for another adventure, another passage through his universe. Jessica found herself tempted to bind him to her own entourage, but Alia's reaction boded evil for brave Mohandis. There were also those signs which said this was the course expected of the Lady Jessica -- take a brave and handsome troubadour into her service as she'd taken brave Gurney Halleck. Best Mohandis were sent on his way, though it rankled to lose such a fine specimen to Farad'n.
    "He shall go to Farad'n," Jessica said. "See that he gets his passage money. Let his tongue draw the blood of House Corrino and see how he survives it."
    Alia glowered at the floor, then produced a belated smile. "The wisdom of the Lady Jessica prevails," she said, waving Mohandis away.
    That did not go the way she wanted, Jessica thought, but there were indicators in Alia's manner that a more potent test remained. 
    Another supplicant was being brought forward.
    Jessica, noting her daughter's reaction, felt the gnawing of doubts. The lesson learned from the twins was needed here. Let Alia be Abomination, still she was one of the preborn. She could know her mother as she knew herself. It did not compute that Alia would misjudge her mother's reactions in the matter of the troubadour. Why did Alia stage that confrontation? To distract me?
    There was no more time to reflect. The second supplicant had taken his place below the twin thrones, his Advocate at his side.
    The supplicant was a Fremen this time, an old man with the sand marks of the desert-born on his face. He was not tall, but had a wiry body and the long dishdasha usually worn over a stillsuit gave him a stately appearance. The robe was in keeping with his narrow face and beaked nose, the glaring eyes of blue-on-blue. He wore no stillsuit and seemed uncomfortable without it. The gigantic space of the Audience Hall must seem to him like the dangerous open air which robbed his flesh of its priceless moisture. Under the hood, which had been thrown partly back, he wore the knotted keffiya headdress of a Naib.
    "I am Ghadhean al-Fali," he said, placing one foot on the steps to the thrones to signify his status above that of the mob. "I was one of Muad'Dib's death commandos and I am here concerning a matter of the desert."
    Alia stiffened only slightly, a small betrayal. Al-Fali's name had been on that demand to place Jessica on the Council. 
    A matter of the desert! Jessica thought.
    Ghadhean al-Fali had spoken before his Advocate could open the pleading. With that formal Fremen phrase he had placed them on notice that he brought them something of concern to all of Dune -- and that he spoke with the authority of a Fedaykin who had offered his life beside that of Paul Muad'Dib. Jessica doubted that this was what Ghadhean al-Fali had told Javid or the Advocate General in seeking audience here. Her guess was confirmed as an official of the Priesthood rushed forward from the rear of the chamber waving the black cloth of intercession.
    "My Ladies!" the official called out. "Do not listen to this man! He comes under false --"
    Jessica, watching the Priest run toward them, caught a movement out of the corners of her eyes, saw Alia's hand signaling in the old Atreides battle language: "Now!" Jessica could not determine where the signal was directed, but acted instinctively with a lurch to the left, taking throne and all. She rolled away from the crashing throne as she fell, came to her feet as she heard the sharp spat of a maula pistol . . . and again. But she was moving with the first sound, felt something tug at her right sleeve. She dove into the throng of supplicants and courtiers gathered below the dais. Alia, she noted, had not moved.
    Surrounded by people, Jessica stopped.
    Ghadhean al-Fali, she saw, had dodged to the other side of the dais, but the Advocate remained in his original position.
    It had all happened with the rapidity of an ambush, but everyone in the Hall knew where trained reflexes should have taken anyone caught by surprise. Alia and the Advocate stood frozen in their exposure.
    A disturbance toward the middle of the room caught Jessica's attention and she forced a way through the throng, saw four supplicants holding the Priest official. His black cloth of intercession lay near his feet, a maula pistol exposed in its folds.
    Al-Fali thrust his way past Jessica, looked from the pistol to the Priest. The Fremen let out a cry of rage, came up from his belt with an achag blow, the fingers of his left hand rigid. They caught the Priest in the throat and he collapsed, strangling. Without a backward glance at the man he had killed, the old Naib turned an angry face toward the dais.
    "Dalal-il 'an-nubuwwa!" al-Fali called, placing both palms against his forehead, then lowering them. "The Qadis as-Salaf will not let me be silenced! If I do not slay those who interfere, others will slay them!"
    He thinks he was the target, Jessica realized. She looked down at her sleeve, put a finger in the neat hole left by the maula pellet. Poisoned, no doubt.
    The supplicants had dropped the Priest. He lay writhing on the floor, dying with his larynx crushed. Jessica motioned to a pair of shocked courtiers standing at her left, said: "I want that man saved for questioning. If he dies, you die!" As they hesitated, peering toward the dais, she used Voice on them: "Move!" 
    The pair moved.
    Jessica thrust herself to al-Fali's side, nudged him: "You are a fool, Naib! They were after me, not you."
    Several people around them heard her. In the immediate shocked silence, al-Fali glanced at the dais with its one toppled throne and Alia still seated on the other. The look of realization which came over his face could've been read by a novice.
    "Fedaykin," Jessica said, reminding him of his old service to her family, "we who have been scorched know how to stand back to back."
    "Trust me, My Lady," he said, taking her meaning immediately.
    A gasp behind Jessica brought her whirling, and she felt al-Fali move to stand with his back to her. A woman in the gaudy garb of a city Fremen was straightening from beside the Priest on the floor. The two courtiers were nowhere to be seen. The woman did not even glance at Jessica, but lifted her voice in the ancient keening of her people -- the call for those who serviced the deathstills, the call for them to come and gather a body's water into the tribal cistern. It was a curiously incongruous noise coming from one dressed as this woman was. Jessica felt the persistence of the old ways even as she saw the falseness in this city woman. The creature in the gaudy dress obviously had killed the Priest to make sure he was silenced.
    Why did she bother? Jessica wondered. She had only to wait for the man to die of asphyxiation. The act was a desperate one, a sign of deep fear.
    Alia sat forward on the edge of her throne, her eyes aglitter with watchfulness. A slender woman wearing the braid knots of Alia's own guards strode past Jessica, bent over the Priest, straightened, and looked back at the dais. "He is dead."
    "Have him removed," Alia called. She motioned to guards below the dais. "Straighten the Lady Jessica's chair."
    So you'll try to brazen it out! Jessica thought. Did Alia think anyone had been fooled? Al-Fali had spoken of the Qadis as-Salaf, calling on the holy fathers of Fremen mythology as his protectors. But no supernatural agency had brought a maula pistol into this room where no weapons were permitted. A conspiracy involving Javid's people was the only answer, and Alia's unconcern about her own person told everyone she was a part of that conspiracy.
    The old Naib spoke over his shoulder to Jessica: "Accept my apologies, My Lady. We of the desert come to you as our last desperate hope, and now we see that you still have need of us." 
    "Matricide does not sit well on my daughter," Jessica said. 
    "The tribes will hear of this," al-Fali promised.
    "If you have such desperate need of me," Jessica asked, "why did you not approach me at the Convocation in Sietch Tabr?" 
    "Stilgar would not permit it."
    Ahhh, Jessica thought, the rule of the Naibs! In Tabr, Stilgar's word was law.
    The toppled throne had been straightened. Alia motioned for her mother to return, said: "All of you please note the death of that traitor-Priest. Those who threaten me die." She glanced at al-Fali. "My thanks to you, Naib."
    "Thanks for a mistake," al-Fali muttered. He looked at Jessica. "You were right. My rage removed one who should've been questioned."
    Jessica whispered: "Mark those two courtiers and the woman in the colorful dress, Fedaykin. I want them taken and questioned." 
    "It will be done," he said.
    "If we get out of here alive," Jessica said. "Come, let us go back and play our parts." 
    "As you say, My Lady."
    Together, they returned to the dais, Jessica mounting the steps and resuming her position beside Alia, al-Fali remaining in the supplicant's position below. 
    "Now," Alia said.
    "One moment, daughter," Jessica said. She held up her sleeve, exposed the hole with a finger through it. "The attack was aimed at me. The pellet almost found me even as I was dodging. You will all note that the maula pistol is no longer down there." She pointed. "Who has it?" 
    There was no response.
    "Perhaps it could be traced," Jessica said. 
    "What nonsense!" Alia said. "I was the --" 
    Jessica half turned toward her daughter, motioned with her left hand. "Someone down there has that pistol. Don't you have a fear that --" 
    "One of my guards has it!" Alia said.
    "Then that guard will bring the weapon to me," Jessica said. 
    "She's already taken it away." 
    "How convenient," Jessica said. 
    "What are you saying?" Alia demanded.
    Jessica allowed herself a grim smile. "I am saying that two of your people were charged with saving that traitor-Priest. I warned them that they would die if he died. They will die." 
    "I forbid it!" 
    Jessica merely shrugged.
    "We have a brave Fedaykin here," Alia said, motioning toward al-Fali. "This argument can wait."
    "It can wait forever," Jessica said, speaking in Chakobsa, her words double-barbed to tell Alia that no argument would stop the death command.
    "We shall see!" Alia said. She turned to al-Fali. "Why are you here, Ghadhean al-Fali?"
    "To see the mother of Muad'Dib," the Naib said. "What is left of the Fedaykin, that band of brothers who served her son, pooled their poor resources to buy my way in here past the avaricious guardians who shield the Atreides from the realities of Arrakis."
    Alia said: "Anything the Fedaykin require, they have only --" 
    "He came to see me," Jessica interrupted. "What is your desperate need, Fedaykin?" 
    Alia said: "I speak for the Atreides here! What is --" 
    "Be silent, you murderous Abomination!" Jessica snapped. "You tried to have me killed, daughter! I say it for all here to know. You can't have everyone in this hall killed to silence them -- as that Priest was silenced. Yes, the Naib's blow would've killed the man, but he could've been saved. He could've been questioned! You have no concern that he was silenced. Spray your protests upon us as you will, your guilt is written in your actions!"
    Alia sat in frozen silence, face pale. And Jessica, watching the play of emotions across her daughter's face, saw a terrifyingly familiar movement of Alia's hands, an unconscious response which once had identified a deadly enemy of the Atreides. Alia's fingers moved in a tapping rhythm -- little finger twice, index finger three times, ring finger twice, little finger once, ring finger twice . . . and back through the tapping in the same order. 
    The old Baron!
    The focus of Jessica's eyes caught Alia's attention and she glanced down at her hand, held it still, looked back at her mother to see the terrible recognition. A gloating smile locked Alia's mouth. 
    "So you have your revenge upon us," Jessica whispered. 
    "Have you gone mad, mother?" Alia asked.
    "I wish I had," Jessica said. And she thought: She knows I will confirm this to the Sisterhood. She knows. She may even suspect I'll tell the Fremen and force her into a Trial of Possession. She cannot let me leave here alive.
    "Our brave Fedaykin waits while we argue," Alia said.
    Jessica forced her attention back to the old Naib. She brought her responses under control, said: "You came to see me, Ghadhean."
    "Yes, My Lady. We of the desert see terrible things happening. The Little Makers come out of the sand as was foretold in the oldest prophecies. Shai-Hulud no longer can be found except in the deeps of the Empty Quarter. We have abandoned our friend, the desert!"
    Jessica glanced at Alia, who merely motioned for Jessica to continue. Jessica looked out over the throng in the Chamber, saw the shocked alertness on every face. The import of the fight between mother and daughter had not been lost on this throng, and they must wonder why the audience continued. She returned her attention to al-Fali.
    "Ghadhean, what is this talk of Little Makers and the scarcity of sandworms?"
    "Mother of Moisture," he said, using her old Fremen title, "we were warned of this in the Kitab al-Ibar. We beseech thee. Let it not be forgotten that on the day Muad'Dib died, Arrakis turned by itself! We cannot abandon the desert."
    "Hah!" Alia sneered. "The superstitious riffraff of the Inner Desert fear the ecological transformation. They --" 
    "I hear you, Ghadhean," Jessica said. "If the worms go, the spice goes. If the spice goes, what coin do we have to buy our way?"
    Sounds of surprise: gasps and startled whispers could be heard spreading across the Great Hall. The Chamber echoed to the sound. 
    Alia shrugged. "Superstitious nonsense!"
    Al-Fali lifted his right hand to point at Alia. "I speak to the Mother of Moisture, not to the Coan-Teen!"
    Alia's hands gripped the arms of her throne, but she remained seated.
    Al-Fali looked at Jessica. "Once it was the land where nothing grew. Now there are plants. They spread like lice upon a wound. There have been clouds and rain along the belt of Dune! Rain, My Lady! Oh, precious mother of Muad'Dib, as sleep is death's brother, so is rain on the Belt of Dune. It is the death of us all." 
    "We do only what Liet-Kynes and Muad'Dib himself designed for us to do," Alia protested. "What is all of this superstitious gabble? We revere the words of Liet-Kynes, who told us: 'I wish to see this entire planet caught up in a net of green plants.' So it will be." 
    "And what of the worms and the spice?" Jessica asked.
    "There'll always be some desert," Alia said. "The worms will survive." 
    She's lying, Jessica thought. Why does she lie? 
    "Help us, Mother of Moisture," al-Fali pleaded.
    With an abrupt sensation of double vision, Jessica felt her awareness lurch, propelled by the old Naib's words. It was the unmistakable adab, the demanding memory which came upon one of itself. It came without qualifications and held her senses immobile while the lesson of the past was impressed upon her awareness. She was caught up in it completely, a fish in the net. Yet she felt the demand of it as a human-most moment, each small part a reminder of creation. Every element of the lesson-memory was real but insubstantial in its constant change, and she knew this was the closest she might ever come to experiencing the prescient dietgrasp which had inflicted itself upon her son.
    Alia lied because she was possessed by one who would destroy the Atreides. She was, in herself, the first destruction. Then al-Fali spoke the truth: the sandworms are doomed unless the course of the ecological transformation is modified.
    In the pressure of revelation, Jessica saw the people of the audience reduced to slow motion, their roles identified for her. She could pick the ones charged with seeing that she did not leave here alive! And the path through them lay there in her awareness as though outlined in bright light -- confusion among them, one of them feinted to stumble into another. Whole groups tangled. She saw, also, that she might leave this Great Hall only to fall into other hands. Alia did not care if she created a martyr. No -- the thing which possessed her did not care.
    Now, in this frozen time, Jessica chose a way to save the old Naib and send him as messenger. The way through the audience remained indelibly clear. How simple it was! They were buffoons with barricaded eyes, their shoulders held in positions of immovable defense. Each position upon the great floor could be seen as an atropic collision from which dead flesh might slough away to reveal skeletons. Their bodies, their clothes, and their faces described individual hells -- the insucked breast of concealed terrors, the glittering hook of a jewel become substitute armor; the mouths were judgments full of frightened absolutes, cathedral prisms of eyebrows showing lofty and religious sentiments which their loins denied.
    Jessica sensed dissolution in the shaping forces loosed upon Arrakis. Al-Fali's voice had been like a distrans in her soul, awakening a beast from the deepest part of her.
    In an eyeblink Jessica moved from the adab into the universe of movement, but it was a different universe from the one which had commanded her attention only a second before.
    Alia was starting to speak, but Jessica said: "Silence!" Then: "There are those who fear that I have returned without reservation to the Sisterhood. But since that day in the desert when the Fremen gave the gift of life to me and to my son, I have been Fremen!" And she lapsed into the old tongue which only those in this room who could profit by it would understand: "Onsar akhaka zeiiman aw maslumen!" Support your brother in his time of need, whether he be just or unjust!
    Her words had the desired effect, a subtle shifting of positions within the Chamber.
    But Jessica raged on: "This Ghadhean al-Fali, an honest Fremen, comes here to tell me what others should have revealed to me. Let no one deny this! The ecological transformation has become a tempest out of control!" 
    Wordless confirmations could be seen throughout the room.
    "And my daughter delights in this!" Jessica said. "Mektub al-mellah! You carve wounds upon my flesh and write there in salt! Why did the Atreides find a home here? Because the Mohalata was natural to us. To the Atreides, government was always a protective partnership: Mohalata, as the Fremen have always known it. Now look at her!" Jessica pointed at Alia. "She laughs alone at night in contemplation of her own evil! Spice production will fall to nothing, or at best a fraction of its former level! And when word of that gets out --"
    "We'll have a corner on the most priceless product in the universe!" Alia shouted.
    "We'll have a corner on hell!" Jessica raged.
    And Alia lapsed into the most ancient Chakobsa, the Atreides private language with its difficult glottal stops and clicks: "Now, you know, mother! Did you think a granddaughter of Baron Harkonnen would not appreciate all of the lifetimes you crushed into my awareness before I was even born? When I raged against what you'd done to me, I had only to ask myself what the Baron would've done. And he answered! Understand me, Atreides bitch! He answered me!"
    Jessica heard the venom and the confirmation of her guess. Abomination! Alia had been overwhelmed within, possessed by that cahueit of evil, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen. The Baron himself spoke from her mouth now, uncaring of what was revealed. He wanted her to see his revenge, wanted her to know that he could not be cast out.
    I'm supposed to remain here helpless in my knowledge, Jessica thought. With the thought, she launched herself onto the path the adab had revealed, shouting: "Fedaykin, follow me!" 
    It turned out there were six Fedaykin in the room, and five of them won through behind her.

= = = = = =

When I am weaker than you, I ask you for freedom because that is according to your principles; when I am stronger than you, I take away your freedom because that is according to my principles.
-Words of an ancient philosopher (Attributed by Harq al-Ada to one Louis Veuillot)

    Leto leaned out the covert exit from the sietch, saw the bight of the cliff towering above his limited view. Late afternoon sunlight cast long shadows in the cliff's vertical striations. A skeleton butterfly flew in and out of the shadows, its webbed wings a transparent lacery against the light. How delicate that butterfly was to exist here, he thought.
    Directly ahead of him lay the apricot orchard, with children working there to gather the fallen fruit. Beyond the orchard was the qanat. He and Ghanima had given the slip to their guards by losing themselves in a sudden crush of incoming workers. It had been a relatively simple matter to worm their way down an air passage to its connection with the steps to the covert exit. Now they had only to mingle themselves with the children, work their way to the qanat and drop into the tunnel. There they could move beside the predator fish which kept sandtrout from encysting the tribe's irrigation water. No Fremen would yet think of a human risking accidental immersion in water.
    He stepped out of the protective passages. The cliff stretched away on both sides of him, turned horizontal just by the act of his own movement.
    Ghanima moved closely behind him. Both carried small fruit baskets woven of spice-fiber, but each basket carried a sealed package: Fremkit, maula pistol, crysknife . . . and the new robes sent by Farad'n.
    Ghanima followed her brother into the orchard, mingled with the working children. Stillsuit masks concealed every face. They were just two more workers here, but she felt the action drawing her life away from protective boundaries and known ways. What a simple step it was, that step from one danger into another!
    In their baskets those new garments sent by Farad'n conveyed a purpose well understood by both of them. Ghanima had accented this knowledge by sewing their personal motto, "We Share," in Chakobsa above the hawk crest at each breast.
    It would be twilight soon and, beyond the qanat which marked off sietch cultivation, there would come a special quality of evening which few places in the universe could match. It would be that softly lighted desert world with its persistent solitude, its saturated sense that each creature in it was alone in a new universe.
    "We've been seen," Ghanima whispered, bending to work beside her brother. 
    "Guards?" 
    "No -- others." 
    "Good." 
    "We must move swiftly," she said.
    Leto acknowledged this by moving away from the cliff through the orchard. He thought with his father's thoughts: Everything remains mobile in the desert or perishes. Far out on the sand he could see The Attendant's outcropping, reminder of the need for mobility. The rocks lay static and rigid in their watchful enigma, fading yearly before the onslaught of wind-driven sand. One day The Attendant would be sand.
    As they neared the qanat they heard music from a high entrance of the sietch. It was an old-style Fremen group -- two-holed flutes, tambourines, tympani made on spice-plastic drums with skins stretched taut across one end. No one asked what animal on this planet provided that much skin.
    Stilgar will remember what I told him about that cleft in The Attendant, Leto thought. He'll come in the dark when it's too late -- and then he'll know.
    Presently they were at the qanat. They slipped into an open tube, climbed down the inspection ladder to the service ledge. It was dusky, damp, and cold in the qanat and they could hear the predator fish splashing. Any sandtrout trying to steal this water would find its water-softened inner surface attacked by the fish. Humans must be wary of them, too.
    "Careful," Leto said, moving down the slippery ledge. He fastened his memory to times and places his flesh had never known. Ghanima followed.
    At the end of the qanat they stripped to their stillsuits and put on the new robes. They left the old Fremen robes behind as they climbed out another inspection tube, wormed their way over a dune and down the far side. There they sat shielded from the sietch, strapped on maula pistols and crysknives, slipped the Fremkit packs onto their shoulders. They no longer could hear the music. 
    Leto arose, struck out through the valley between the dunes.
    Ghanima fell into step behind him, moving with practiced unrhythmical quiet over the open sand.
    Below the crest of each dune they bent low and crept across into the hidden lee, there to pause and peer backward seeking pursuit. No hunters had emerged upon the desert by the time they reached the first rocks.
    In the shadows of the rocks they worked their way around The Attendant, climbed to a ledge looking out upon the desert. Colors blinked far out on the bled. The darkening air held the fragility of fine crystal. The landscape which met their gaze was beyond pity, nowhere did it pause -- no hesitations in it at all. The gaze stayed upon no single place in its scanning movements across that immensity.
    It is the horizon of eternity, Leto thought.
    Ghanima crouched beside her brother, thinking: The attack will come soon. She listened for the slightest sound, her whole body transformed into a single sense of taut probing.
    Leto sat equally alert. He knew now the culmination of all the training which had gone into the lives he shared so intimately. In this wilderness one developed a firm dependence upon the senses, all of the senses. Life became a hoard of stored perceptions, each one linked only to momentary survival.
    Presently Ghanima climbed up the rocks and peered through a notch at the way they had come. The safety of the sietch seemed a lifetime away, a bulk of dumb cliffs rising out of brown-purple distance, dust-blurred edges at the rim where the last of the sunlight cast its silver streaks. Still no pursuit could be seen in the intervening distance. She returned to Leto's side.
    "It'll be a predatory animal," Leto said. "That's my tertiary computation."
    "I think you stopped computing too soon," Ghanima said. "It'll be more than one animal. House Corrino has learned not to put all of its hopes into a single bag." 
    Leto nodded agreement.
    His mind felt suddenly heavy with the multitude of lives which his difference provided him: all of those lives, his even before birth. He was saturated with living and wanted to flee from his own consciousness. The inner world was a heavy beast which could devour him.
    Restlessly he arose, climbed to the notch Ghanima had used, peered at the cliffs of the sietch. Back there, beneath the cliff, he could see how the qanat drew a line between life and death. On the oasis edge he could see camel sage, onion grass, gobi feather grass, wild alfalfa. In the last of the light he could make out the black movements of birds pick-hopping in the alfalfa. The distant grain tassels were ruffled by a wind which drew shadows that moved right up to the orchard. The motion caught at his awareness, and he saw that the shadows hid within their fluid form a larger change, and that larger change gave ransom to the turning rainbows of a silver-dusted sky.
    What will happen out here? he asked himself.
    And he knew it would either be death or the play of death, himself the object. Ghanima would be the one to return, believing the reality of a death she had seen or reporting sincerely from a deep hypnotic compulsion that her brother was, indeed, slain.
    The unknowns of this place haunted him. He thought how easy it would be to succumb to the demand for prescience, to risk launching his awareness into an unchanging, absolute future. The small vision of his dream was bad enough, though. He knew he dared not risk the larger vision.
    Presently, he returned to Ghanima's side. 
    "No pursuit yet," he said.
    "The beasts they send for us will be large," Ghanima said. "We may have time to see them coming." 
    "Not if they come in the night." 
    "It'll be dark very soon," she said.
    "Yes. It's time we went down into our place." He indicated the rocks to their left and below them where windsand had eaten a tiny cleft in the basalt. It was large enough to admit them, but small enough to keep out large creatures. Leto felt himself reluctant to go there, but knew it must be done. That was the place he'd pointed out to Stilgar.
    "They may really kill us," he said.
    "This is the chance we have to take," she said. "We owe it to our father." 
    "I'm not arguing."
    And he thought: This is the correct path; we do the right thing. But he knew how dangerous it was to be right in this universe. Their survival now demanded vigor and fitness and an understanding of the limitations in every moment. Fremen ways were their best armor, and the Bene Gesserit knowledge was a force held in reserve. They were both thinking now as Atreides-trained battle veterans with no other defenses than a Fremen toughness which was not even hinted at by their childish bodies and their formal attire.
    Leto fingered the hilt of the poison-tipped crysknife at his waist. Unconsciously Ghanima duplicated the gesture.
    "Shall we go down now?" Ghanima asked. As she spoke she saw the movement far below them, small movement made less threatening by distance. Her stillness alerted Leto before she could utter a warning.
    "Tigers," he said.
    "Laza tigers," she corrected him. 
    "They see us," he said.
    "We'd better hurry," she said. "A maula would never stop those creatures. They will've been well trained for this."
    "They'll have a human director somewhere around," he said, leading the way at a fast lope down the rocks to the left.
    Ghanima agreed, but kept it to herself, saving her strength. There'd be a human around somewhere. Those tigers couldn't be allowed to run free until the proper moment.
    The tigers moved fast in the last of the light, leaping from rock to rock. They were eye-minded creatures and soon it would be night, the time of the ear-minded. The bell-call of a nightbird came from The Attendant's rocks to emphasize the change. Creatures of the darkness already were hustling in the shadows of the etched crevasses.
    Still the tigers remained visible to the running twins. The animals flowed with power, a rippling sense of golden sureness in every movement.
    Leto felt that he had stumbled into this place to free himself from his soul. He ran with the sure knowledge that he and Ghanima could reach their narrow notch in time, but his gaze kept returning with fascination to the oncoming beasts. 
    One stumble and we're lost, he thought.
    That thought reduced the sureness of his knowledge, and he ran faster.

= = = = = =

You Bene Gesserit call your activity of the Panoplia Prophetica a "Science of Religion." Very well. I, a seeker after another kind of scientist, find this an appropriate definition. You do, indeed, build your own myths, but so do all societies. You I must warn, however. You are behaving as so many other misguided scientists have behaved. Your actions reveal that you wish to take something out of [away from] life. It is time you were reminded of that which you so often profess: One cannot have a single thing without its opposite.
-The Preacher at Arrakeen: A Message to the Sisterhood

    In the hour before dawn, Jessica sat immobile on a worn rug of spice-cloth. Around her were the bare rocks of an old and poor sietch, one of the original settlements. It lay below the rim of Red Chasm, sheltered from the westerlies of the desert. Al-Fali and his brothers had brought her here; now they awaited word from Stilgar. The Fedaykin had moved cautiously in the matter of communication, however. Stilgar was not to know their location.
    The Fedaykin already knew they were under a proces-verbal, an official report of crimes against the Imperium. Alia was taking the tack that her mother had been suborned by enemies of the realm, although the Sisterhood had not yet been named. The high-handed, tyrannical nature of Alia's power was out in the open, however, and her belief that because she controlled the Priesthood she controlled the Fremen was about to be tested.
    Jessica's message to Stilgar had been direct and simple: "My daughter is possessed and must be put to the trial." 
    Fears destroyed values, though, and it already was known that some Fremen would prefer not to believe this accusation. Their attempts to use the accusation as a passport had brought on two battles during the night, but the ornithopters al-Fali's people had stolen had brought the fugitives to this precarious safety: Red Chasm Sietch. Word was going out to the Fedaykin from here, but fewer than two hundred of them remained on Arrakis. The others held posts throughout the Empire.
    Reflecting upon these facts, Jessica wondered if she had come to the place of her death. Some of the Fedaykin believed it, but the death commandos accepted this easily enough. Al-Fali had merely grinned at her when some of his young men voiced their fears.
    "When God hath ordained a creature to die in a particular place. He causeth that creature's wants to direct him to that place," the old Naib had said.
    The patched curtains at her doorway rustled; al-Fali entered. The old man's narrow, windburned face appeared drawn, his eyes feverish. Obviously he had not rested. 
    "Someone comes," he said. 
    "From Stilgar?"
    "Perhaps." He lowered his eyes, glanced leftward in the manner of the old Fremen who brought bad news. 
    "What is it?" Jessica demanded.
    "We have word from Tabr that your grandchildren are not there." He spoke without looking at her. 
    "Alia . . ."
    "She has ordered that the twins be given over to her custody, but Sietch Tabr reports that the children are not there. That is all we know." 
    "Stilgar's sent them into the desert," Jessica said.
    "Possibly, but it is known that he was searching for them all through the night. Perhaps it was a trick on his part . . ." 
    "That's not Stilgar's way," she said, and thought: Unless the twins put him up to it. But that didn't feel right either. She wondered at herself: no sensations of panic to suppress, and her fears for the twins were tempered by what Ghanima had revealed. She peered up at al-Fali, found him studying her with pity in his eyes. She said: "They've gone into the desert by themselves." 
    "Alone? Those two children!"
    She did not bother to explain that "those two children" probably knew more about desert survival than most living Fremen. Her thoughts were fixed, instead, on Leto's odd behavior when he'd insisted that she allow herself to be abducted. She'd put the memory aside, but this moment demanded it. He'd said she would know the moment to obey him.
    "The messenger should be in the sietch by now," al-Fali said. "I will bring him to you." He let himself out through the patched curtain.
    Jessica stared at the curtain. It was red cloth of spice-fiber, but the patches were blue. The story was that this sietch had refused to profit from Muad'Dib's religion, earning the enmity of Alia's Priesthood. The people here reportedly had put their capital into a scheme to raise dogs as large as ponies, dogs bred for intelligence as guardians of children. The dogs had all died. Some said it was poison and the Priests were blamed.
    She shook her head to drive out these reflections, recognizing them for what they were: ghafla, the gadfly distraction.
    Where had those children gone? To Jacurutu? They had a plan. They tried to enlighten me to the extent they thought I'd accept, she remembered. And when they'd reached the limits as they saw them, Leto had commanded her to obey. 
    He'd commanded her!
    Leto had recognized what Alia was doing; that much was obvious. Both twins had spoken of their aunt's "affliction," even when defending her. Alia was gambling on the rightness of her position in the Regency. Demanding custody of the twins confirmed that. Jessica found a harsh laugh shaking her own breast. The Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam had been fond of explaining this particular error to her student, Jessica. "If you focus your awareness only upon your own rightness, then you invite the forces of opposition to overwhelm you. This is a common error. Even I, your teacher, have made it."
    "And even I, your student, have made it," Jessica whispered to herself.
    She heard fabrics whispering in the passage beyond the curtain. Two young Fremen entered, part of the entourage they'd picked up during the night. The two were obviously awed at being in the presence of Muad'Dib's mother. Jessica had read them completely: they were non-thinkers, attaching themselves to any fancied power for the identity which this gave them. Without a reflection from her they were empty. Thus, they were dangerous.
    "We were sent ahead by al-Fali to prepare you," one of the young Fremen said.
    Jessica felt an abrupt clenching tightness in her breast, but her voice remained calm. "Prepare me for what?" 
    "Stilgar has sent Duncan Idaho as his messenger." 
    Jessica pulled her aba hood up over her hair, an unconscious gesture. Duncan? But he was Alia's tool.
    The Fremen who'd spoken took a half step forward. "Idaho says he has come to take you to safety, but al-Fali does not see how this can be."
    "It seems passing strange, indeed," Jessica said. "But there are stranger things in our universe. Bring him."
    They glanced at each other but obeyed, leaving together with such a rush that they tore another rent in the worn curtain.
    Presently Idaho stepped through the curtain, followed by the two Fremen and al-Fali bringing up the rear, hand on his crysknife. Idaho appeared composed. He wore the dress casuals of an Atreides House Guard, a uniform which had changed little in more than fourteen centuries. Arrakis had replaced the old gold-handled plasteel blade with a crysknife, but that was minor. 
    "I'm told you wish to help me," Jessica said. 
    "As odd as that may seem," he said.
    "But didn't Alia send you to abduct me?" she asked.
    A slight raising of his black eyebrows was the only mark of surprise. The many-faceted Tleilaxu eyes continued to stare at her with glittering intensity. "Those were her orders," he said.
    Al-Fali's knuckles went white on his crysknife, but he did not draw.
    "I've spent much of this night reviewing the mistakes I made with my daughter," she said.
    "There were many," Idaho agreed, "and I shared in most of them." 
    She saw now that his jaw muscles were trembling.
    "It was easy to listen to the arguments which led us astray," Jessica said. "I wanted to leave this place . . . You . . . you wanted a girl you saw as a younger version of me." 
    He accepted this silently.
    "Where are my grandchildren?" she demanded, voice going harsh.
    He blinked. Then: "Stilgar believes they have gone into the desert -- hiding. Perhaps they saw this crisis coming." 
    Jessica glanced at al-Fali, who nodded his recognition that she had anticipated this.
    "What is Alia doing?" Jessica asked. 
    "She risks civil war," he said. 
    "Do you believe it'll come to that?"
    Idaho shrugged. "Probably not. These are softer times. There are more people willing to listen to pleasant arguments." 
    "I agree," she said. "Well and good, what of my grandchildren?" 
    "Stilgar will find them -- if . . ."
    "Yes, I see." It was really up to Gurney Halleck then. She turned to look at the rock wall on her left. "Alia grasps the power firmly now." She looked back at Idaho. "You understand? One uses power by grasping it lightly. To grasp too strongly is to be taken over by power, and thus to become its victim." 
    "As my Duke always told me," Idaho said.
    Somehow Jessica knew he meant the older Leto, not Paul. She asked: "Where am I to be taken in this . . . abduction?" 
    Idaho peered down at her as though trying to see into the shadows created by the hood.
    Al-Fali stepped forward: "My Lady, you are not seriously thinking . . ." 
    "Is it not my right to decide my own fate?" Jessica asked. 
    "But this . . ." Al-Fali's head nodded toward Idaho.
    "This was my loyal guardian before Alia was born," Jessica said. "Before he died saving my son's life and mine. We Atreides always honor certain obligations." 
    "Then you will go with me?" Idaho asked. 
    "Where would you take her?" al-Fali asked. 
    "Best that you don't know," Jessica said.
    Al-Fali scowled but remained silent. His face betrayed indecision, an understanding of the wisdom in her words but an unresolved doubt of Idaho's trustworthiness.
    "What of the Fedaykin who helped me?" Jessica asked.
    "They have Stilgar's countenance if they can get to Tabr," Idaho said. Jessica faced al-Fali: "I command you to go there, my friend. Stilgar can use Fedaykin in the search for my grandchildren."
    The old Naib lowered his gaze. "As Muad'Dib's mother commands." 
    He's still obeying Paul, she thought.
    "We should be out of here quickly," Idaho said. "The search is certain to include this place, and that early."
    Jessica rocked forward and arose with that fluid grace which never quite left the Bene Gesserit, even when they felt the pangs of age. And she felt old now after her night of flight. Even as she moved, her mind remained on that peculiar interview with her grandson. What was he really doing? She shook her head, covered the motion by adjusting her hood. It was too easy to fall into the trap of underestimating Leto. Life with ordinary children conditioned one to a false view of the inheritance which the twins enjoyed.
    Her attention was caught by Idaho's pose. He stood in the relaxed preparedness for violence, one foot ahead of the other, a stance which she herself had taught him. She shot a quick look at the two young Fremen, at al-Fali. Doubts still assailed the old Fremen Naib and the two young men felt this.
    "I trust this man with my life," she said, addressing herself to al-Fali. "And it is not the first time."
    "My Lady," al-Fali protested. "It's just . . ." He glared at Idaho. "He's the husband of the Coan-Teen!" 
    "And he was trained by my Duke and by me," she said. 
    "But he's a ghola!" The words were torn from al-Fali. 
    "My son's ghola," she reminded him.
    It was too much for a former Fedaykin who'd once pledged himself to support Muad'Dib to the death. He sighed, stepped aside, and motioned the two young men to open the curtains.
    Jessica stepped through, Idaho behind her. She turned, spoke to al-Fali in the doorway. "You are to go to Stilgar. He's to be trusted." 
    "Yes . . ." But she still heard doubts in the old man's voice.
    Idaho touched her arm. "We should go at once. Is there anything you wish to take?" 
    "Only my common sense," she said. 
    "Why? Do you fear you're making a mistake?" 
    She glanced up at him. "You were always the best 'thopter pilot in our service, Duncan."
    This did not amuse him. He stepped ahead of her, moving swiftly, retracing the way he'd come. Al-Fali fell into step beside Jessica. "How did you know he came by 'thopter?" 
    "He wears no stillsuit," Jessica said.
    Al-Fali appeared abashed by this obvious perception. He would not be silenced, though. "Our messenger brought him here directly from Stilgar's. They could've been seen." 
    "Were you seen, Duncan?" Jessica asked Idaho's back.
    "You know better than that," he said. "We flew lower than the dune tops."
    They turned into a side passage which led downward in spiral steps, debouching finally into an open chamber well-lighted by glowglobes high in the brown rock. A single ornithopter sat facing the far wall, crouched there like an insect waiting to spring. The wall would be false rock, then -- a door opening onto the desert. As poor as this sietch was, it still maintained the instruments of secrecy and mobility.
    Idaho opened the ornithopter's door for her, helped her into the right-hand seat. As she moved past him, she saw perspiration on his forehead where a lock of the black goat-hair lay tumbled. Unbidden, Jessica found herself recalling that head spouting blood in a noisy cavern. The steely marbles of the Tleilaxu eyes brought her out of that recollection. Nothing was as it seemed anymore. She busied herself fastening her seatbelt.
    "It's been along time since you've flown me, Duncan," she said.
    "Long and far time," he said. He was already checking the controls.
    Al-Fali and the two younger Fremen waited beside the controls to the false rock, prepared to open it.
    "Do you think I harbor doubts about you?" Jessica asked, speaking softly to Idaho.
    Idaho kept his attention on an engine instrument, ignited the impellers and watched a needle move. A smile touched his mouth, a quick and harsh gesture in his sharp features, gone as quickly as it had come.
    "I am still Atreides," Jessica said. "Alia is not." 
    "Have no fear," he grated. "I still serve the Atreides." 
    "Alia is no longer Atreides," Jessica repeated.
    "You needn't remind me!" he snarled. "Now shut up and let me fly this thing."
    The desperation in his voice was quite unexpected, out of keeping with the Idaho she'd known. Putting down a renewed sense of fear, Jessica asked: "Where are we going, Duncan? You can tell me now."
    But he nodded to al-Fali and the false rock opened outward into bright silvery sunlight. The ornithopter leaped outward and up, its wings throbbing with the effort, the jets roaring, and they mounted into an empty sky. Idaho set a southwesterly course toward Sahaya Ridge which could be seen as a dark line upon the sand. 
    Presently he said: "Do not think harshly of me, My Lady." 
    "I haven't thought harshly of you since that night you came into our Arrakeen great hall roaring drunk on spice-beer," she said. But his words renewed her doubts, and she fell into the relaxed preparedness of complete prana-bindu defense.
    "I remember that night well," he said. "I was very young . . . inexperienced." 
    "But the best swordmaster in my Duke's retinue." 
    "Not quite, My Lady. Gurney could best me six times out of ten." He glanced at her. "Where is Gurney?" 
    "Doing my bidding."
    He shook his head.
    "Do you know where we're going?" she asked. 
    "Yes, My Lady." 
    "Then tell me."
    "Very well. I promised that I would create a believable plot against House Atreides. Only one way, really, to do that." He pressed a button on the control wheel and cocoon restraints whipped from Jessica's seat, enfolded her in unbreakable softness, leaving only her head exposed. "I'm taking you to Salusa Secundus," he said. "To Farad'n."
    In a rare, uncontrolled spasm, Jessica surged against the restraints, felt them tighten, easing only when she relaxed, but not before she felt the deadly shigawire concealed in the protective sheathing.
    "The shigawire release has been disconnected," he said, not looking at her. "Oh yes, and don't try Voice on me. I've come a long way since the days when you could move me that way." He looked at her. "The Tleilaxu armored me against such wiles." 
    "You're obeying Alia," Jessica said, "and she --" 
    "Not Alia," he said. "We do The Preacher's bidding. He wants you to teach Farad'n as once you taught . . . Paul." 
    Jessica remained in frozen silence, remembering Leto's words, that she would find an interesting student. Presently she said: "This Preacher -- is he my son?"
    Idaho's voice seemed to come from a great distance: "I wish I knew."

= = = = = =

The universe is just there; that's the only way a Fedaykin can view it and remain the master of his senses. The universe neither threatens nor promises. It holds things beyond our sway: the fall of a meteor, the eruption of a spiceblow, growing old and dying. These are the realities of this universe and they must be faced regardless of how you feel about them. You cannot fend off such realities with words. They will come at you in their own wordless way and then, then you will understand what is meant by "life and death." Understanding this, you will be filled with joy.
-Muad'Dib to his Fedaykin

    "And those are the things we have set in motion," Wensicia said. "These things were done for you."
    Farad'n remained motionless, seated across from his mother in her morning room. The sun's golden light came from behind him, casting his shadow on the white-carpeted floor. Light reflected from the wall behind his mother drew a nimbus around her hair. She wore her usual white robe trimmed in gold -- reminders of royal days. Her heart-shaped face appeared composed, but he knew she was watching his every reaction. His stomach felt empty, although he'd just come from breakfast.
    "You don't approve?" Wensicia asked. 
    "What is there to disapprove?" he asked. 
    "Well . . . that we kept this from you until now?" 
    "Oh, that." He studied his mother, tried to reflect upon his complex position in this matter. He could only think on a thing he had noticed recently, that Tyekanik no longer called her "My Princess." What did he call her? Queen Mother?
    Why do I feel a sense of loss? he wondered. What am I losing? The answer was obvious: he was losing his carefree days, time for those pursuits of the mind which so attracted him. If this plot unfolded by his mother came off, those things would be gone forever. New responsibilities would demand his attention. He found that he resented this deeply. How dared they take such liberties with his time? And without even consulting him!
    "Out with it," his mother said. "Something's wrong."
    "What if this plan fails?" he asked, saying the first thing that came into his mind. 
    "How can it fail?"
    "I don't know . . . Any plan can fail. How're you using Idaho in all of this?"
    "Idaho? What's this interest in . . . Oh, yes -- that mystic fellow Tyek brought here without consulting me. That was wrong of him. The mystic spoke of Idaho, didn't he?"
    It was a clumsy lie on her part, and Farad'n found himself staring at his mother in wonderment. She'd known about The Preacher all along!
    "It's just that I've never seen a ghola," he said.
    She accepted this, said: "We're saving Idaho for something important." 
    Farad'n chewed silently at his upper lip.
    Wensicia found herself reminded of his dead father. Dalak had been like that at times, very inward and complex, difficult to read. Dalak, she reminded herself, had been related to Count Hasimir Fenring, and there'd been something of the dandy and the fanatic in both of them. Would Farad'n follow in that path? She began to regret having Tyek lead the lad into the Arrakeen religion. Who knew where that might take him?
    "What does Tyek call you now?" Farad'n asked. 
    "What's that?" She was startled by this shift.
    "I've noticed that he doesn't call you 'My Princess' anymore."
    How observant he is, she thought, wondering why this filled her with disquiet. Does he think I've taken Tyek as a lover? Nonsense, it wouldn't matter one way or the other. Then why this question?
    "He calls me 'My Lady,' " she said. 
    "Why?" 
    "Because that's the custom in all of the Great Houses." 
    Including the Atreides, he thought.
    "It's less suggestive if overheard," she explained. "Some will think we've given up our legitimate aspirations." 
    "Who would be that stupid?" he asked.
    She pursed her lips, decided to let it pass. A small thing, but great campaigns were made up of many small things. 
    "The Lady Jessica shouldn't have left Caladan," he said.
    She shook her head sharply. What was this? His mind was darting around like a crazy thing! She said: "What do you mean?"
    "She shouldn't have gone back to Arrakis," he said. "That's bad strategy. Makes one wonder. Would've been better to have her grandchildren visit her on Caladan."
    He's right, she thought, dismayed that this had never occurred to her. Tyek would have to explore this immediately. Again she shook her head. No! What was Farad'n doing? He must know that the Priesthood would never risk both twins in space. 
    She said this.
    "Is it the Priesthood or the Lady Alia?" he asked, noting that her thoughts had gone where he had wanted. He found exhilaration in his new importance, the mind-games available in political plotting. It had been a long time since his mother's mind had interested him. She was too easily maneuvered.
    "You think Alia wants power for herself?" Wensicia asked.
    He looked away from her. Of course Alia wanted the power for herself! All of the reports from that accursed planet agreed on this. His thoughts took off on a new course.
    "I've been reading about their Planetologist," he said. "There has to be a clue to the sandworms and the haploids in there somewhere, if only . . ."
    "Leave that to others now!" she said, beginning to lose patience with him. "Is this all you have to say about the things we've done for you?" 
    "You didn't do them for me," he said. 
    "Wha-a-at?"
    "You did it for House Corrino," he said, "and you're House Corrino right now. I've not been invested."
    "You have responsibilities!" she said. "What about all of the people who depend upon you?"
    As if her words put the burden upon him, he felt the weight of all those hopes and dreams which followed House Corrino.
    "Yes," he said, "I understand about them, but I find some of the things done in my name distasteful."
    "Dis . . . How can you say such a thing? We do what any Great House would do in promoting its own fortunes!" 
    "Do you? I think you've been a bit gross. No! Don't interrupt me. If I'm to be an Emperor, then you'd better learn how to listen to me. Do you think I cannot read between the lines? How were those tigers trained?"
    She remained speechless at this cutting demonstration of his perceptive abilities.
    "I see." he said. "Well, I'll keep Tyek because I know you led him into this. He's a good officer under most circumstances, but he'll fight for his own principles only in a friendly arena." 
    "His . . . principles?"
    "The difference between a good officer and a poor one is strength of character and about five heartbeats," he said. "He has to stick by his principles wherever they're challenged." 
    "The tigers were necessary," she said.
    "I'll believe that if they succeed," he said. "But I will not condone what had to be done in training them. Don't protest. It's obvious. They were conditioned. You said it yourself." 
    "What're you going to do?" she asked.
    "I'm going to wait and see," he said. "Perhaps I'll become Emperor."
    She put a hand to her breast, sighed. For a few moments there he'd terrified her. She'd almost believed he would denounce her. Principles! But he was committed now; she could see that.
    Farad'n got up, went to the door and rang for his mother's attendants. He looked back: "We are through, aren't we?" 
    "Yes." She raised a hand as he started to leave. "Where're you going?"
    "To the library. I've become fascinated lately by Corrino history." He left her then, sensing how he carried his new commitment with him. 
    Damn her!
    But he knew he was committed. And he recognized that there was a deep emotional difference between history as recorded on shigawire and read at leisure, a deep difference between that kind of history and the history which one lived. This new living history which he felt gathering around him possessed a sense of plunging into an irreversible future. Farad'n could feel himself driven now by the desires of all those whose fortunes rode with him. He found it strange that he could not pin down his own desires in this.

= = = = = =

It is said of Muad'Dib that once when he saw a weed trying to grow between two rocks, he moved one of the rocks. Later, when the weed was seen to be flourishing, he covered it with the remaining rock. "That was its fate," he explained.
-The Commentaries

    "Now!" Ghanima shouted.
    Leto, two steps ahead of her in reaching the narrow cut in the rocks, did not hesitate. He dove into the slit, crawled forward until darkness enfolded him. He heard Ghanima drop behind him, a sudden stillness, and her voice, not hurrying or fearful: 
    "I'm stuck."
    He stood up, knowing this would bring his head within reach of questing claws, reversed himself in the narrow passage, crept back until he felt Ghanima's outstretched hand. 
    "It's my robe," she said. "It's caught."
    He heard rocks falling directly below them, pulled on her hand but felt only a small gain.
    There was panting below them, a growl.
    Leto tensed himself, wedging his hips against the rock, heaved on Ghanima's arm. Cloth ripped and he felt her jerk toward him. She hissed and he knew she felt pain, but he pulled once more, harder. She came farther into the hole, then all the way, dropping beside him. They were too close to the end of the cut, though. He turned, dropped to all fours, scrambled deeper. Ghanima pulled herself along behind him. There was a panting intensity to her movements which told him she'd been hurt. He came to the end of the opening, rolled over and peered upward out the narrow gap of their sanctuary. The opening was about two meters above him, filled with stars. Something large obscured the stars.
    A rumbling growl filled the air around the twins. It was deep, menacing, an ancient sound: hunter speaking to its prey.
    "How badly are you hurt?" Leto asked, keeping his voice even.
    She matched him, tone for tone: "One of them clawed me. Breached my stillsuit along the left leg. I'm bleeding."
    "How bad?" 
    "Vein. I can stop it."
    "Use pressure," he said. "Don't move. I'll take care of our friends." 
    "Careful," she said. "They're bigger than I expected." 
    Leto unsheathed his crysknife, reached up with it. He knew the tiger would be questing downward, claws raking the narrow passage where its body could not go.
    Slowly, slowly, he extended the knife. Abruptly something struck the top of the blade. He felt the blow all along his arm, almost lost his grip on the knife. Blood gushed along his hand, spattered his face, and there came an immediate scream which deafened him. The stars became visible. Something threshed and flung itself down the rocks toward the sand in a violent caterwauling.
    Once more, the stars were obscured and he heard the hunter's growl. The second tiger had moved into place, unmindful of its companion's fate.
    "They're persistent," Leto said.
    "You got one for sure," Ghanima said. "Listen!" 
    The screams and thrashing convulsions below them were growing fainter. The second tiger remained, though, a curtain against the stars.
    Leto sheathed his blade, touched Ghanima's arm. "Give me your knife. I want a fresh tip to make sure of this one." 
    "Do you think they'll have a third one in reserve?" She asked. 
    "Not likely. Laza tigers hunt in pairs." 
    "Just as we do," she said.
    "As we do," he agreed. He felt the handle of her crysknife slip into his palm, gripped it tightly. Once more he began that careful upward questing. The blade encountered only empty air, even when he reached into a level dangerous to his body. He withdrew, pondering this.
    "Can't you find it?" 
    "It's not behaving the way the other one did." 
    "It's still there. Smell it?"
    He swallowed in a dry throat. A fetid breath, moist with the musky smell of the cat, assaulted his nostrils. The stars were still blocked from view. Nothing could be heard of the first cat; the crysknife's poison had completed its work. 
    "I think I'm going to have to stand up," he said. 
    "No!" 
    "It has to be teased into reach of the knife."
    "Yes, but we agreed that if one of us could avoid being wounded . . ."
    "And you're wounded, so you're the one going back," he said.
    "But if you're badly injured, I won't be able to leave you," she said.
    "Do you have a better idea?" 
    "Give me back my knife." 
    "But your leg!" 
    "I can stand on the good one."
    "That thing could take your head off with one sweep. Maybe the maula . . ."
    "If there's anyone out there to hear, they'll know we came prepared for --" 
    "I don't like your taking this risk!" he said.
    "Whoever's out there mustn't learn we have maulas -- not yet." She touched his arm. "I'll be careful, keep my head down." 
    As he remained silent, she said: "You know I'm the one who has to do this. Give me back my knife."
    Reluctantly he quested with his free hand, found her hand and returned the knife. It was the logical thing to do, but logic warred with every emotion in him.
    He felt Ghanima pull away, heard the sandy rasping of her robe against the rock. She gasped, and he knew she must be standing. Be very careful! he thought. And he almost pulled her back to insist they use a maula pistol. But that could warn anyone out there that they had such weapons. Worse, it could drive the tiger out of reach, and they'd be trapped in here with a wounded tiger waiting for them in some unknown place out on those rocks.
    Ghanima took a deep breath, braced her back against one wall of the cleft. I must be quick, she thought. She reached upward with the knife point. Her left leg throbbed where the claws had raked it. She felt the crusting of blood against her skin there and the warmth of a new flow. Very quick! She sank her senses into the calm preparation for crisis which the Bene Gesserit Way provided, put pain and all other distractions out of her awareness. The cat must reach down! Slowly she passed the blade along the opening. Where was the damned animal? Once more she raked the air. Nothing. The tiger would have to be lured into attack.
    Carefully she probed with her sense of smell. Warm breath came from her left. She poised herself, drew in a deep breath, screamed: "Taqwa!" It was the old Fremen battlecry, its meaning found in the most ancient legends: "The price of freedom!" With the cry she tipped the blade and stabbed along the cleft's dark opening. Claws found her elbow before the knife touched flesh, and she had time only to tip her wrist toward the pain before agony raked her arm from elbow to wrist. Through the pain, she felt the poison tip sink into the tiger. The blade was wrenched from her numb fingers. But again the narrow gap of the cleft lay open to the stars and the wailing voice of a dying cat filled the night. They followed it by its death throes, a thrashing passage down the rocks. Presently the death-silence came.
    "It got my arm," Ghanima said, trying to bind a loose fold of her robe around the wound. 
    "Badly?" 
    "I think so. I can't feel my hand." 
    "Let me get a light and --" 
    "Not until we get under cover!" 
    "I'll hurry."
    She heard him twisting to reach his Fremkit, felt the dark slickness of a nightshield as it was slipped over her head, tucked in behind her. He didn't bother to make it moisture tight.
    "My knife's on this side," she said. "I can feel the handle with my knee." 
    "Leave it for now."
    He ignited a single small globe. The brilliance of it made her blink. Leto put the globe on the sandy floor at one side, gasped as he saw her arm. One claw had opened a long, gaping wound which twisted from the elbow along the back of her arm almost to the wrist. The wound described the way she had rotated her arm to present the knife tip to the tiger's paw.
    Ghanima glanced once at the wound, closed her eyes and began reciting the litany against fear.
    Leto found himself sharing her need, but put aside the clamor of his own emotions while he set about binding up the wound. It had to be done carefully to stop the flow of blood while retaining the appearance of a clumsy job which Ghanima might have done by herself. He made her tie off the knot with her free hand, holding one end of the bandage in her teeth.
    "Now let's look at the leg," he said.
    She twisted around to present the other wound. It was not as bad: two shallow claw cuts along the calf. They had bled freely into the stillsuit, however. He cleaned it up as best he could, bound the wound beneath the stillsuit. He sealed the suit over the bandage.
    "I got sand in it," he said. "Have it treated as soon as you get back."
    "Sand in our wounds," she said. "That's an old story for Fremen." 
    He managed a smile, sat back.
    Ghanima took a deep breath. "We've pulled it off." 
    "Not yet."
    She swallowed, fighting to recover from the aftermath of shock. Her face appeared pale in the light of the glowglobe. And she thought: Yes, we must move fast now. Whoever controlled those tigers could be out there right now.
    Leto, staring at his sister, felt a sudden wrenching sense of loss. It was a deep pain which shot through his breast. He and Ghanima must separate now. For all of those years since birth they had been as one person. But their plan demanded now that they undergo a metamorphosis, going their separate ways into uniqueness where the sharing of daily experiences would never again unite them as they once had been united.
    He retreated into the necessarily mundane. "Here's my Fremkit. I took the bandages from it. Someone may look." 
    "Yes." She exchanged kits with him.
    "Someone out there has a transmitter for those cats," he said. "Most likely he'll be waiting near the qanat to make certain of us." 
    She touched her maula pistol where it sat atop the Fremkit, picked it up and thrust it into the sash beneath her robe. "My robe's torn." 
    "Yes."
    "Searchers may get here soon," he said. "They may have a traitor among them. Best you slip back alone. Get Harrah to hide you."
    "I'll . . . I'll start the search for the traitor as soon as I get back," she said. She peered into her brother's face, sharing his painful knowledge that from this point on they would accumulate a store of differences. Never again would they be as one, sharing knowledge which no one else could understand. 
    "I'll go to Jacurutu," he said. 
    "Fondak," she said.
    He nodded his agreement. Jacurutu/Fondak -- they had to be the same place. It was the only way the legendary place could have been hidden. Smugglers had done it, of course. How easy for them to convert one label into another, acting under the cover of the unspoken convention by which they were allowed to exist. The ruling family of a planet must always have a back door for escape in extremis. And a small share in smuggling profits kept the channels open. In Fondak/Jacurutu, the smugglers had taken over a completely operative sietch untroubled by a resident population. And they had hidden Jacurutu right out in the open, secure in the taboo which kept Fremen from it.
    "No Fremen will think to search for me in such a place," he said. "They'll inquire among the smugglers, of course, but . . ." 
    "We'll do as we agreed," she said. "It's just . . ." 
    "I know." Hearing his own voice, Leto realized they were drawing out these last moments of sameness. A wry grin touched his mouth, adding years to his appearance. Ghanima realized she was seeing him through a veil of time, looking at an older Leto. Tears burned her eyes.
    "You needn't give water to the dead just yet," he said, brushing a finger against the dampness on her cheeks. "I'll go out far enough that no one will hear, and I'll call a worm." He indicated the collapsed Maker hooks strapped to the outside of his Fremkit. "I'll be at Jacurutu before dawn two days from now." 
    "Ride swiftly, my old friend," she whispered.
    "I'll come back to you, my only friend," he said. "Remember to be careful at the qanat."
    "Choose a good worm," she said, giving him the Fremen words of parting. Her left hand extinguished the glowglobe, and the nightseal rustled as she pulled it aside, folded it and tucked it into her kit. She felt him go, hearing only the softest of sounds quickly fading into silence as he crept down the rocks into the desert.
    Ghanima steeled herself then for what she had to do. Leto must be dead to her. She had to make herself believe it. There could be no Jacurutu in her mind, no brother out there seeking a place lost in Fremen mythology. From this point onward she could not think of Leto as alive. She must condition herself to react out of a total belief that her brother was dead, killed here by Laza tigers. Not many humans could fool a Truthsayer, but she knew that she could do it . . . might have to do it. The multi-lives she and Leto shared had taught them the way: a hypnotic process old in Sheba's time, although she might be the only human alive who could recall Sheba as a reality. The deep compulsions had been designed with care and, for a long time after Leto had gone, Ghanima reworked her self-awareness, building the lonely sister, the surviving twin, until it was a believable totality. As she did this, she found the inner world becoming silent, blanked away from intrusion into her consciousness. It was a side effect she had not expected.
    If only Leto could have lived to learn this, she thought, and she did not find the thought a paradox. Standing, she peered down at the desert where the tiger had taken Leto. There was a sound growing in the sand out there, a familiar sound to Fremen: the passage of a worm. Rare as they had become in these parts, a worm still came. Perhaps the first cat's death throes . . . Yes, Leto had killed one cat before the other one got him. It was oddly symbolic that a worm should come. So deep was her compulsion that she saw three dark spots far down on the sand: the two tigers and Leto. Then the worm came and there was only sand with its surface broken into new waves by the passage of Shai-Hulud. It had not been a very large worm . . . but large enough. And her compulsion did not permit her to see a small figure riding on the ringed back.
    Fighting her grief, Ghanima sealed her Fremkit, crept cautiously from her hiding place. Hand on her maula pistol, she scanned the area. No sign of a human with a transmitter. She worked her way up the rocks and across to the far side, creeping through moonshadows, waiting and waiting to be sure no assassin lurked in her path.
    Across the open space she could see torches at Tabr, the wavering activity of a search. A dark patch moved across the sand toward The Attendant. She chose her path to run far to the north of the approaching party, went down to the sand and moved into the dune shadows. Careful to make her steps fall in a broken rhythm which would not attract a worm, she set out into the lonely distance which separated Tabr from the place where Leto had died. She would have to be careful at the qanat, she knew. Nothing must prevent her from telling how her brother had perished saving her from the tigers.

= = = = = =

Governments, if they endure, always tend increasingly toward aristocratic forms. No government in history has been known to evade this pattern. And as the aristocracy develops, government tends more and more to act exclusively in the interests of the ruling class -- whether that class be hereditary royalty, oligarchs of financial empires, or entrenched bureaucracy.
-Politics as Repeat Phenomenon: Bene Gesserit Training Manual

    "Why does he make us this offer?" Farad'n asked. "That's most essential."
    He and the Bashar Tyekanik stood in the lounge of Farad'n's private quarters. Wensicia sat at one side on a low blue divan, almost as audience rather than participant. She knew her position and resented it, but Farad'n had undergone a terrifying change since that morning when she'd revealed their plots to him.
    It was late afternoon at Corrino Castle and the low light accented the quiet comfort of this lounge -- a room lined with actual books reproduced in plastino, with shelves revealing a horde of player spools, data blocks, shigawire reels, mnemonic amplifiers. There were signs all around that this room was much used -- worn places on the books, bright metal on the amplifiers, frayed corners on the data blocks. There was only the one divan, but many chairs -- all of them sensiform floaters designed for unobtrusive comfort.
    Farad'n stood with his back to a window. He wore a plain Sardaukar uniform in grey and black with only the golden lion-claw symbols on the wings of his collar as decoration. He had chosen to receive the Bashar and his mother in this room, hoping to create an atmosphere of more relaxed communication than could be achieved in a more formal setting. But Tyekanik's constant "My Lord this" and "My Lady that" kept them at a distance.
    "My Lord, I don't think he'd make this offer were he unable to deliver," Tyekanik said.
    "Of course not!" Wensicia intruded.
    Farad'n merely glanced at his mother to silence her, asked: "We've put no pressure on Idaho, made no attempt to seek delivery on The Preacher's promise?" 
    "None," Tyekanik said.
    "Then why does Duncan Idaho, noted all of his life for his fanatic loyalty to the Atreides, offer now to deliver the Lady Jessica into our hands?" 
    "These rumors of trouble on Arrakis . . ." Wensicia ventured.
    "Unconfirmed," Farad'n said. "Is it possible that The Preacher has precipitated this?" 
    "Possible," Tyekanik said, "but I fail to see a motive." 
    "He speaks of seeking asylum for her," Farad'n said. "That might follow if those rumors . . ." 
    "Precisely," his mother said.
    "Or it could be a ruse of some sort," Tyekanik said.
    "We can make several assumptions and explore them," Farad'n said. "What if Idaho has fallen into disfavor with his Lady Alia?" 
    "That might explain matters," Wensicia said, "but he --" 
    "No word yet from the smugglers?" Farad'n interrupted. "Why can't we --"
    "Transmission is always slow in this season," Tyekanik said, "and the needs of security . . ."
    "Yes, of course, but still . . ." Farad'n shook his head. "I don't like our assumption."
    "Don't be too quick to abandon it," Wensicia said. "All of those stories about Alia and that Priest, whatever his name is . . ." 
    "Javid," Farad'n said. "But the man's obviously --" 
    "He's been a valuable source of information for us," Wensicia said.
    "I was about to say that he's obviously a double agent," Farad'n said. "How could he indict himself in this? He's not to be trusted. There are too many signs . . ." 
    "I fail to see them," she said.
    He was suddenly angry with her denseness. "Take my word for it, mother! The signs are there; I'll explain later." 
    "I'm afraid I must agree," Tyekanik said.
    Wensicia lapsed into hurt silence. How dared they push her out of Council like this? As though she were some light-headed fancy woman with no --
    "We mustn't forget that Idaho was once a ghola," Farad'n said. "The Tleilaxu . . ." He glanced sidelong at Tyekanik.
    "That avenue will be explored," Tyekanik said. He found himself admiring the way Farad'n's mind worked: alert, questing, sharp. Yes, the Tleilaxu, in restoring life to Idaho, might have planted a powerful barb in him for their own use. 
    "But I fail to apprehend a Tleilaxu motive," Farad'n said.
    "An investment in our fortunes," Tyekanik said. "A small insurance for future favors?" 
    "Large investment, I'd call it," Farad'n said. 
    "Dangerous," Wensicia said.
    Farad'n had to agree with her. The Lady Jessica's capabilities were notorious in the Empire. After all, she'd been the one who'd trained Muad'Dib.
    "If it became known that we hold her," Farad'n said.
    "Yes, that'd be a two-edged sword," Tyekanik said. "But it need not be known."
    "Let us assume," Farad'n said, "that we accept this offer. What's her value? Can we exchange her for something of greater importance?" 
    "Not openly," Wensicia said.
    "Of course not!" He peered expectantly at Tyekanik. 
    "That remains to be seen," Tyekanik said.
    Farad'n nodded. "Yes. I think if we accept, we should consider the Lady Jessica as money banked for indeterminate use. After all, wealth doesn't necessarily have to be spent on any particular thing. It's just . . . potentially useful." 
    "She'd be a very dangerous captive," Tyekanik said.
    "There is that to consider, indeed," Farad'n said. "I'm told that her Bene Gesserit Ways permit her to manipulate a person just by the subtle employment of her voice."
    "Or her body," Wensicia said. "Irulan once divulged to me some of the things she'd learned. She was showing off at the time, and I saw no demonstrations. Still the evidence is pretty conclusive that Bene Gesserits have their ways of achieving their ends." 
    "Were you suggesting," Farad'n asked, "that she might seduce me?" 
    Wensicia merely shrugged.
    "I'd say she's a little old for that, wouldn't you?" Farad'n asked.
    "With a Bene Gesserit, nothing's certain," Tyekanik said.
    Farad'n experienced a shiver of excitement tinged with fear. Playing this game to restore House of Corrino's high seat of power both attracted and repelled him. How attractive it remained, the urge to retire from this game into his preferred pursuits -- historical research and learning the manifest duties for ruling here on Salusa Secundus. The restoration of his Sardaukar forces was a task in itself . . . and for that job, Tyek was still a good tool. One planet was, after all, an enormous responsibility. But the Empire was an even greater responsibility, far more attractive as an instrument of power. And the more he read about Muad'Dib/Paul Atreides, the more fascinated Farad'n became with the uses of power. As titular head of House Corrino, heir of Shaddam IV, what a great achievement it would be to restore his line to the Lion Throne. He wanted that! He wanted it. Farad'n had found that, by repeating this enticing litany to himself several times, he could overcome momentary doubts.
    Tyekanik was speaking: ". . . and of course, the Bene Gesserit teach that peace encourages aggressions, thus igniting war. The paradox of --"
    "How did we get on this subject?" Farad'n asked, bringing his attention back from the arena of speculation.
    "Why," Wensicia said sweetly, having noted the woolgathering expression on her son's face, "I merely asked if Tyek was familiar with the driving philosophy behind the Sisterhood." 
    "Philosophy should be approached with irreverence," Farad'n said, turning to face Tyekanik. "In regard to Idaho's offer, I think we should inquire further. When we think we know something, that's precisely the moment when we should look deeper into the thing."
    "It will be done," Tyekanik said. He liked this cautious streak in Farad'n, but hoped it did not extend to those military decisions which required speed and precision.
    With seeming irrelevancy, Farad'n asked: "Do you know what I find most interesting about the history of Arrakis? It was the custom in primitive times for Fremen to kill on sight anyone not clad in a stillsuit with its easily visible and characteristic hood." 
    "What is your fascination with the stillsuit?" Tyekanik asked. 
    "So you've noticed, eh?" 
    "How could we not notice?" Wensicia asked.
    Farad'n sent an irritated glance at his mother. Why did she interrupt like that? He returned his attention to Tyekanik.
    "The stillsuit is the key to that planet's character, Tyek. It's the hallmark of Dune. People tend to focus on the physical characteristics: the stillsuit conserves body moisture, recycles it, and makes it possible to exist on such a planet. You know, the Fremen custom was to have one stillsuit for each member of a family, except for food gatherers. They had spares. But please note, both of you --" He moved to include his mother in this. "-- how garments which appear to be stillsuits, but really aren't, have become high fashion throughout the Empire. It's such a dominant characteristic for humans to copy the conqueror!"
    "Do you really find such information valuable?" Tyekanik asked, his tone puzzled.
    "Tyek, Tyek -- without such information, one cannot govern. I said the stillsuit was the key to their character and it is! It's a conservative thing. The mistakes they make will be conservative mistakes."
    Tyekanik glanced at Wensicia, who was staring at her son with a worried frown. This characteristic of Farad'n's both attracted and worried the Bashar. It was so unlike old Shaddam. Now, there had been an essential Sardaukar: a military killer with few inhibitions. But Shaddam had fallen to the Atreides under that damnable Paul. Indeed, what he read of Paul Atreides revealed just such characteristics as Farad'n now displayed. It was possible that Farad'n might hesitate less than the Atreides over brutal necessities, but that was his Sardaukar training.
    "Many have governed without using this kind of information," Tyekanik said.
    Farad'n merely stared at him for a moment. Then: "Governed and failed."
    Tyekanik's mouth drew into a stiff line at this obvious allusion to Shaddam's failure. That had been a Sardaukar failure, too, and no Sardaukar could recall it easily.
    Having made his point, Farad'n said: "You see, Tyek, the influence of a planet upon the mass unconscious of its inhabitants has never been fully appreciated. To defeat the Atreides, we must understand not only Caladan but Arrakis: one planet soft and the other a training ground for hard decisions. That was a unique event, that marriage of Atreides and Fremen. We must know how it worked or we won't be able to match it, let alone defeat it."
    "What does this have to do with Idaho's offer?" Wensicia demanded.
    Farad'n glanced pityingly down at his mother. "We begin their defeat by the kinds of stress we introduce into their society. That's a very powerful tool: stress. And the lack of it is important, too. Did you not mark how the Atreides helped things grow soft and easy here?"
    Tyekanik allowed himself a curt nod of agreement. That was a good point. The Sardaukar could not be permitted to grow too soft. This offer from Idaho still bothered him, though. He said: "Perhaps it'd be best to reject the offer."
    "Not yet," Wensicia said. "We've a spectrum of choices open to us. Our task is to identify as much of the spectrum as we can. My son is right: we need more information."
    Farad'n stared at her, measuring her intent as well as the surface meaning of her words. "But will we know when we've passed the point of no alternate choice?" he asked.
    A sour chuckle came from Tyekanik. "If you ask me, we're long past the point of no return."
    Farad'n tipped his head back to laugh aloud. "But we still have alternate choices, Tyek! When we come to the end of our rope, that's an important place to recognize!"

= = = = = =

In this age when the means of human transport include devices which can span the deeps of space in transtime, and other devices which can carry men swiftly over virtually impassable planetary surfaces, it seems odd to think of attempting long journeys afoot. Yet this remains a primary means of travel on Arrakis, a fact attributed partly to preference and partly to the brutal treatment which this planet reserves for anything mechanical. In the strictures of Arrakis, human flesh remains the most durable and reliable resource for the Hajj. Perhaps it is the implicit awareness of this fact which makes Arrakis the ultimate mirror of the soul.
-Handbook of the Hajj

    Slowly, cautiously, Ghanima made her way back to Tabr, holding herself to the deepest shadows of the dunes, crouching in stillness as the search party passed to the south of her. Terrible awareness gripped her: the worm which had taken the tigers and Leto's body, the dangers ahead. He was gone; her twin was gone. She put aside all tears and nurtured her rage. In this, she was pure Fremen. And she knew this, reveling in it.
    She understood what was said about Fremen. They were not supposed to have a conscience, having lost it in a burning for revenge against those who had driven them from planet to planet in the long wandering. That was foolishness, of course. Only the rawest primitive had no conscience. Fremen possessed a highly evolved conscience which centered on their own welfare as a people. It was only to outsiders that they seemed brutish -- just as outsiders appeared brutish to Fremen. Every Fremen knew very well that he could do a brutal thing and feel no guilt. Fremen did not feel guilt for the same things that aroused such feelings in others. Their rituals provided a freedom from guilts which might otherwise have destroyed them. They knew in their deepest awareness that any transgression could be ascribed, at least in part, to well recognized extenuating circumstances: "the failure of authority," or "a natural bad tendency" shared by all humans, or to "bad luck," which any sentient creature should be able to identify as a collision between mortal flesh and the outer chaos of the universe.
    In this context Ghanima felt herself to be the pure Fremen, a carefully prepared extension of tribal brutality. She needed only a target -- and that, obviously, was House Corrino. She longed to see Farad'n's blood spilled on the ground at her feet.
    No enemy awaited her at the qanat. Even the search parties had gone elsewhere. She crossed the water on an earth bridge, crept through tall grass toward the covert exit of the sietch. Abruptly light flared ahead of her and Ghanima threw herself flat on the ground. She peered out through stalks of giant alfalfa. A woman had entered the covert passage from the outside, and someone had remembered to prepare that passage in the way any sietch entrance should be prepared. In troubled times, one greeted anyone entering the sietch with bright light, temporarily blinding the newcomer and giving guards time to decide. But such a greeting was never meant to be broadcast out over the desert. The light visible here meant the outer seals had been left aside.
    Ghanima felt a tug of bitterness at this betrayal of sietch security: this flowing light. The ways of the lace-shirt Fremen were to be found everywhere!
    The light continued to throw its fan over the ground at the cliff base. A young girl ran out of the orchard's darkness into the light, something fearful about her movements. Ghanima could see the bright circle of a glowglobe within the passage, a halo of insects around it. The light illuminated two dark shadows in the passage: a man and the girl. They were holding hands as they stared into each other's eyes.
    Ghanima sensed something wrong about the man and woman there. They were not just two lovers stealing a moment from the search. The light was suspended above and beyond them in the passage. The two talked against a glowing arch, throwing their shadows into the outer night where anyone could be a watcher of their movements. Now and again the man would free a hand. The hand would come gesturing into the light, a sharp and furtive movement which, once completed, returned to the shadows.
    Lonely sounds of night creatures filled the darkness around Ghanima, but she screened out such distractions. 
    What was it about those two?
    The man's motions were so static, so careful.
    He turned. Reflection from the woman's robe illuminated him, exposing a raw red face with a large blotchy nose. Ghanima drew in a deep, silent breath of recognition. Palimbasha! He was a grandson of a Naib whose sons had fallen in Atreides service. The face -- and another thing revealed by the open swinging of his robe as he turned -- drew for Ghanima a complete picture. He wore a belt beneath the robe, and attached to the belt was a box which glistened with keys and dials. It was an instrument of the Tleilaxu or the Ixians for certain. And it had to be the transmitter which had released the tigers. Palimbasha. This meant that another Naibate family had gone over to House Corrino.
    Who was the woman, then? No matter. She was someone being used by Palimbasha.
    Unbidden, a Bene Gesserit thought came into Ghanima's mind: Each planet has its own period, and each life likewise.
    She recalled Palimbasha well, watching him there with that woman, seeing the transmitter, the furtive movements. Palimbasha taught in the sietch school. Mathematics. The man was a mathematical boor. He had attempted to explain Muad'Dib through mathematics until censured by the Priesthood. He was a mind-slaver and his enslaving process could be understood with extreme simplicity: he transferred technical knowledge without a transfer of values.
    I should've suspected him earlier, she thought. The signs were all there.
    Then, with an acid tightening of her stomach: He killed my brother!
    She forced herself to calmness. Palimbasha would kill her, too, if she tried to pass him there in the covert passage. Now she understood the reason for this un-Fremen display of light, this betrayal of the hidden entrance. They were watching by that light to see if either of their victims had escaped. It must be a terrible time of waiting for them, not knowing. And now that Ghanima had seen the transmitter, she could explain certain of the hand motions. Palimbasha was depressing one of the transmitter's keys frequently, an angry gesture.
    The presence of this pair said much to Ghanima. Likely every way into the sietch carried a similar watcher in its depths.
    She scratched her nose where dust tickled it. Her wounded leg still throbbed and the knife arm ached when it didn't burn. The fingers remained numb. Should it come to a knife, she would have to use the blade in her left hand.
    Ghanima thought of using the maula pistol, but its characteristic sound would be sure to attract unwanted attention. Some other way would have to be found.
    Palimbasha turned away from the entrance once more. He was a dark object against the light. The woman turned her attention to the outer night while she talked. There was a trained alertness about the woman, a sense that she knew how to look into the shadows, using the edges of her eyes. She was more than just a useful tool, then. She was part of the deeper conspiracy.
    Ghanima recalled now that Palimbasha aspired to be a Kaymakam, a political governor under the Regency. He would be part of a larger plan, that was clear. There would be many others with him. Even here in Tabr. Ghanima examined the edges of the problem thus exposed, probed into it. If she could take one of these guardians alive, many others would be forfeit.
    The whiffle of a small animal drinking at the qanat behind her caught Ghanima's awareness. Natural sounds and natural things. Her memory searched through a strange silent barrier in her mind, found a priestess of Jowf captured in Assyria by Sennacherib. The memories of that priestess told Ghanima what would have to be done here. Palimbasha and his woman there were mere children, wayward and dangerous. They knew nothing of Jowf, knew not even the name of the planet where Sennacherib and the priestess had faded into dust. The thing which was about to happen to the pair of conspirators, if it were explained to them, could only be explained in terms of beginning here. 
    And ending here.
    Rolling onto her side, Ghanima freed her Fremkit, slipped the sandsnorkel from its bindings. She uncapped the sandsnorkel, removed the long filter within it. Now she had an open tube. She selected a needle from the repair pack, unsheathed her crysknife, and inserted the needle into the poison hollow at the knife's tip, that place where once a sandworm's nerve had fitted. Her injured arm made the work difficult. She moved carefully and slowly, handling the poisoned needle with caution while she took a wad of spice-fiber from its chamber in the kit. The needle's shank fitted tightly into the fiber wad, forming a missile which went tightly into the tube of the sandsnorkel.
    Holding the weapon flat, Ghanima wormed her way closer to the light, moving slowly to cause minimal disturbance in the alfalfa. As she moved, she studied the insects around the light. Yes, there were piume flies in that fluttering mob. They were notorious biters of human flesh. The poisoned dart might go unnoticed, swatted aside as a biting fly. A decision remained: Which one of those two to take -- the man or the woman!
    Muriz. The name came unbidden into Ghanima's mind. That was the woman's name. It recalled things said about her. She was one of those who fluttered around Palimbasha as the insects fluttered around the light. She was easily swayed, a weak one.
    Very well. Palimbasha had chosen the wrong companion for this night.
    Ghanima put the tube to her mouth and, with the memory of the priestess of Jowf clearly in her awareness, she sighted carefully, expelled her breath in one strong surge.
    Palimbasha batted at his cheek, drew away a hand with a speck of blood on it. The needle was nowhere to be seen, flicked away by the motion of his own hand.
    The woman said something soothing and Palimbasha laughed. As he laughed, his legs began to give away beneath him. He sagged against the woman, who tried to support him. She was still staggering with the dead weight when Ghanima came up beside her and pressed the point of an unsheathed crysknife against her waist.
    In a conversational tone, Ghanima said: "Make no sudden moves, Muriz. My knife is poisoned. You may let go of Palimbasha now. He is dead."

= = = = = =

In all major socializing forces you will find an underlying movement to gain and maintain power through the use of words. From witch doctor to priest to bureaucrat it is all the same. A governed populace must be conditioned to accept power-words as actual things, to confuse the symbolized system with the tangible universe. In the maintenance of such a power structure, certain symbols are kept out of the reach of common understanding -- symbols such as those dealing with economic manipulation or those which define the local interpretation of sanity. Symbol-secrecy of this form leads to the development of fragmented sub-languages, each being a signal that its users are accumulating some form of power. With this insight into a power process, our Imperial Security Force must be ever alert to the formation of sub-languages.
-Lecture to the Arrakeen War College by, The Princess Irulan

    "It is perhaps unnecessary to tell you," Farad'n said, "but to avoid any errors I'll announce that a mute has been stationed with orders to kill you both should I show signs of succumbing to witchery."
    He did not expect to see any effect from these words. Both the Lady Jessica and Idaho gratified his expectations.
    Farad'n had chosen with care the setting for this first examination of the pair, Shaddam's old State Audience Chamber. What it lacked in grandeur it made up for with exotic appointments. Outside it was a winter afternoon, but the windowless chamber's lighting simulated a timeless summer day bathed in golden light from artfully scattered glowglobes of the purest Ixian crystal.
    The news from Arrakis filled Farad'n with quiet elation. Leto, the male twin, was dead, killed by an assassin-tiger. Ghanima, the surviving sister, was in the custody of her aunt and reputedly was a hostage. The full report did much to explain the presence of Idaho and the Lady Jessica. Sanctuary was what they wanted. Corrino spies reported an uneasy truce on Arrakis. Alia had agreed to submit herself to a test called "the Trial of Possession," the purpose of which had not been fully explained. However, no date had been set for this trial and two Corrino spies believed it might never take place. This much was certain, though: there had been fighting between desert Fremen and the Imperial Military Fremen, an abortive civil war which had brought government to a temporary standstill. Stilgar's holdings were now neutral ground, designated after an exchange of hostages. Ghanima evidently had been considered one of these hostages, although the working of this remained unclear.
    Jessica and Idaho had been brought to the audience securely bound in suspensor chairs. Both were held down by deadly thin strands of shigawire which would cut flesh at the slightest struggle. Two Sardaukar troopers had brought them, checked the bindings, and had gone away silently.
    The warning had, indeed, been unnecessary. Jessica had seen the armed mute standing against a wall at her right, an old but efficient projectile weapon in his hand. She allowed her gaze to roam over the room's exotic inlays. The broad leaves of the rare iron bush had been set with eye pearls and interlaced to form the center crescent of the domed ceiling. The floor beneath her was alternate blocks of diamond wood and kabuzu shell arranged within rectangular borders of passaquet bones. These had been set on end, laser-cut and polished. Selected hard materials decorated the walls in stress-woven patterns which outlined the four positions of the Lion symbol claimed by descendants of the late Shaddam IV. The lions were executed in wild gold.
    Farad'n had chosen to receive the captives while standing. He wore uniform shorts and a light golden jacket of elf-silk open at the throat. His only decoration was the princely starburst of his royal family worn at the left breast. He was attended by the Bashar Tyekanik wearing Sardaukar dress tans and heavy boots, an ornate lasegun carried in a front holster at the belt buckle. Tyekanik, whose heavy visage was known to Jessica from Bene Gesserit reports, stood three paces to the left and slightly behind Farad'n. A single throne of dark wood sat on the floor near the wall directly behind the two.
    "Now," Farad'n said, addressing Jessica, "do you have anything to say?"
    "I would inquire why we are bound thus?" Jessica said, indicating the shigawire.
    "We have only just now received reports from Arrakis to explain your presence here," Farad'n said. "Perhaps I'll have you released presently." He smiled. "If you --" He broke off as his mother entered by the State doors behind the captives.
    Wensicia hurried past Jessica and Idaho without a glance, presented a small message cube to Farad'n, actuated it. He studied the glowing face, glancing occasionally at Jessica, back to the cube. The glowing face went dark and he returned the cube to his mother, indicated that she should show it to Tyekanik. While she was doing this, he scowled at Jessica.
    Presently Wensicia stationed herself at Farad'n's right hand, the darkened cube in her hand, partly concealed in a fold of her white gown.
    Jessica glanced to her right at Idaho, but he refused to meet her gaze.
    "The Bene Gesserit are displeased with me," Farad'n said. "They believe I was responsible for the death of your grandson." 
    Jessica held her face emotionless, thinking: So Ghanima's story is to be trusted, unless . . . She didn't like the suspected unknowns.
    Idaho closed his eyes, opened them to glance at Jessica, She continued to stare at Farad'n. Idaho had told her about this Rhajia vision, but she'd seemed unworried. He didn't know how to catalogue her lack of emotion. She obviously knew something, though, that she wasn't revealing.
    "This is the situation," Farad'n said, and he proceeded to explain everything he'd learned about events on Arrakis, leaving out nothing. He concluded: "Your granddaughter survives, but she's reportedly in the custody of the Lady Alia. This should gratify you." 
    "Did you kill my grandson?" Jessica asked.
    Farad'n answered truthfully: "I did not. I recently learned of a plot, but it was not of my making."
    Jessica looked at Wensicia, saw the gloating expression on that heart-shaped face, thought: Her doing! The lioness schemes for her cub. This was a game the lioness might live to regret.
    Returning her attention to Farad'n, Jessica said: "But the Sisterhood believes you killed him." 
    Farad'n turned to his mother. "Show her the message." 
    As Wensicia hesitated, he spoke with an edge of anger which Jessica noted for future use. "I said show it to her!" 
    Face pale, Wensicia presented the message face of the cube to Jessica, activated it. Words flowed across the face, responding to Jessica's eve movements: "Bene Gesserit Council on Wallach IX files formal protest against House Corrino in assassination of Leto Atreides II. Arguments and showing of evidence are assigned to Landsraad Internal Security Commission. Neutral ground will be chosen and names of judges will be submitted for approval by all parties. Your immediate response required. Sabit Rekush for the Landsraad."
    Wensicia returned to her son's side.
    "How do you intend to respond?" Jessica asked.
    Wensicia said: "Since my son has not yet been formally invested as head of House Corrino, I will -- Where are you going?" This last was addressed to Farad'n who, as she spoke, turned and headed for a side door near the watchful mute.
    Farad'n paused, half turned. "I'm going back to my books and the other pursuits which hold much more interest for me." 
    "How dare you?" Wensicia demanded. A dark flush spread from her neck up across her cheeks.
    "I'll dare quite a few things in my own name," Farad'n said. "You have made decisions in my name, decisions which I find extremely distasteful. Either I will make the decisions in my own name from this point on or you can find yourself another heir for House Corrino!"
    Jessica passed her gaze swiftly across the participants in this confrontation, seeing the real anger in Farad'n. The Bashar Aide stood stiffly at attention, trying to make it appear that he had heard nothing. Wensicia hesitated on the brink of screaming rage. Farad'n appeared perfectly willing to accept any outcome from his throw of the dice. Jessica rather admired his poise, seeing many things in this confrontation which could be of value to her. It seemed that the decision to send assassin tigers against her grandchildren had been made without Farad'n's knowledge. There could be little doubt of his truthfulness in saying he'd learned of the plot after its inception. There was no mistaking the real anger in his eyes as he stood there, ready to accept any decision.
    Wensicia took a deep, trembling breath. Then: "Very well. The formal investiture will take place tomorrow. You may act in advance of it now." She looked at Tyekanik, who refused to meet her gaze.
    There'll be a screaming fight once mother and son get out of here, Jessica thought. But I do believe he has won. She allowed her thoughts to return then to the message from the Landsraad. The Sisterhood had judged their messengers with a finesse which did credit to Bene Gesserit planning. Hidden in the formal notice of protest was a message for Jessica's eyes. The fact of the message said the Sisterhood's spies knew Jessica's situation and they'd gauged Farad'n with a superb nicety to guess he'd show it to his captive.
    "I'd like an answer to my question," Jessica said, addressing herself to Farad'n as he returned to face her.
    "I shall tell the Landsraad that I had nothing to do with this assassination," Farad'n said. "I will add that I share the Sisterhood's distaste for the manner of it, although I cannot be completely displeased at the outcome. My apologies for any grief this may have caused you. Fortune passes everywhere."
    Fortune passes everywhere! Jessica thought. That'd been a favorite saying of her Duke, and there'd been something in Farad'n's manner which said he knew this. She forced herself to ignore the possibility that they'd really killed Leto. She had to assume that Ghanima's fears for Leto had motivated a complete revelation of the twins' plan. The smugglers would put Gurney in position to meet Leto then and the Sisterhood's devices would be carried out. Leto had to be tested. He had to be. Without the testing he was doomed as Alia was doomed. And Ghanima . . . Well, that could be faced later. There was no way to send the pre-born before a Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam.
    Jessica allowed herself a deep sigh. "Sooner or later," she said, "it'll occur to someone that you and my granddaughter could unite our two Houses and heal old wounds."
    "This has already been mentioned to me as a possibility," Farad'n said, glancing briefly as his mother. "My response was that I'd prefer to await the outcome of recent events on Arrakis. There's no need for a hasty decision."
    "There's always the possibility that you've already played into my daughter's hands," Jessica said. 
    Farad'n stiffened. "Explain!"
    "Matters on Arrakis are not as they may seem to you," Jessica said. "Alia plays her own game. Abomination's game. My granddaughter is in danger unless Alia can contrive a way to use her." 
    "You expect me to believe that you and your daughter oppose each other, that Atreides fights Atreides?"
    Jessica looked at Wensicia, back to Farad'n. "Corrino fights Corrino."
    A wry smile moved Farad'n's lips. "Well taken. How would I have played into your daughter's hands?"
    "By becoming implicated in my grandson's death, by abducting me."
    "Abduct . . ." 
    "Don't trust this witch," Wensicia cautioned.
    "I'll choose whom to trust, mother," Farad'n said. "Forgive me, Lady Jessica, but I don't understand this matter of abduction. I'd understood that you and your faithful retainer --" 
    "Who is Alia's husband," Jessica said.
    Farad'n turned a measuring stare on Idaho, looked to the Bashar. "What think you, Tyek?"
    The Bashar apparently was having thoughts similar to those Jessica professed. He said: "I like her reasoning. Caution!" 
    "He's a ghola-mentat," Farad'n said. "We could test him to the death and not find a certain answer."
    "But it's a safe working assumption that we may've been tricked," Tyekanik said.
    Jessica knew the moment had come to make her move. Now if Idaho's grief only kept him locked in the part he'd chosen. She disliked using him this way, but there were larger considerations.
    "To begin with," Jessica said, "I might announce publicly that I came here of my own free choice." 
    "Interesting," Farad'n said.
    "You'd have to trust me and grant me the complete freedom of Salusa Secundus," Jessica said. "There could be no appearance that I spoke out of compulsion." 
    "No!" Wensicia protested.
    Farad'n ignored her. "What reason would you give?" 
    "That I'm the Sisterhood's plenipotentiary sent here to take over your education." 
    "But the Sisterhood accuses --" 
    "That'd require a decisive action from you," Jessica said. 
    "Don't trust her!" Wensicia said.
    With extreme politeness, Farad'n glanced at her, said: "If you interrupt me once more, I'll have Tyek remove you. He heard you consent to the formal investiture. That binds him to me now." 
    "She's a witch, I tell you!" Wensicia looked to the mute against the side wall.
    Farad'n hesitated. Then: "Tyek, what think you? Have I been witched?" 
    "Not in my judgment. She --" 
    "You've both been witched!" 
    "Mother." His tone was flat and final.
    Wensicia clenched her fists, tried to speak, whirled, and fled the room.
    Addressing himself once more to Jessica, Farad'n asked: "Would the Bene Gesserit consent to this?" 
    "They would."
    Farad'n absorbed the implications of this, smiled tightly. "What does the Sisterhood want in all of this?" 
    "Your marriage to my granddaughter."
    Idaho shot a questioning look at Jessica, made as though to speak, but remained silent.
    Jessica said: "You were going to say something, Duncan?" 
    "I was going to say that the Bene Gesserit want what they've always wanted: a universe which won't interfere with them." 
    "An obvious assumption," Farad'n said, "but I hardly see why you intrude with it."
    Idaho's eyebrows managed the shrug which the shigawire would not permit his body. Disconcertingly, he smiled.
    Farad'n saw the smile, whirled to confront Idaho. "I amuse you?"
    "This whole situation amuses me. Someone in your family has compromised the Spacing Guild by using them to carry instruments of assassination to Arrakis, instruments whose intent could not be concealed. You've offended the Bene Gesserit by killing a male they wanted for their breeding pro --" 
    "You call me a liar, ghola?"
    "No. I believe you didn't know about the plot. But I thought the situation needed bringing into focus." 
    "Don't forget that he's a mentat," Jessica cautioned.
    "My very thought," Farad'n said. Once more he faced Jessica. "Let us say that I free you and you make your announcement. That still leaves the matter of your grandson's death. The mentat is correct." 
    "Was it your mother?" Jessica asked. 
    "My Lord!" Tyekanik warned.
    "It's all right, Tyek." Farad'n waved a hand easily. "And if I say it was my mother?"
    Risking everything in the test of this internal break among the Corrino, Jessica said: "You must denounce her and banish her." 
    "My Lord," Tyekanik said, "there could be trickery within trickery here."
    Idaho said: "And the Lady Jessica and I are the ones who've been tricked." 
    Farad'n's jaw hardened.
    And Jessica thought: Don't interfere, Duncan! Not now! But Idaho's words had sent her own Bene Gesserit abilities at logic into motion. He shocked her. She began to wonder if there were the possibility that she was being used in ways she didn't understand. Ghanima and Leto . . . The pre-born could draw upon countless inner experiences, a storehouse of advice far more extensive than the living Bene Gesserit depended upon. And there was that other question: Had her own Sisterhood been completely candid with her? They still might not trust her. After all, she'd betrayed them once . . . to her Duke.
    Farad'n looked at Idaho with a puzzled frown. "Mentat, I need to know what this Preacher is to you."
    "He arranged the passage here. I . . . We did not exchange ten words. Others acted for him. He could be . . . He could be Paul Atreides, but I don't have enough data for certainty. All I know for certain is that it was time for me to leave and he had the means." 
    "You speak of being tricked," Farad'n reminded him.
    "Alia expects you to kill us quietly and conceal the evidence of it," Idaho said. "Having rid her of the Lady Jessica, I'm no longer useful. And the Lady Jessica, having served her Sisterhood's purposes, is no longer useful to them. Alia will be calling the Bene Gesserit to account, but they will win."
    Jessica closed her eyes in concentration. He was right! She could hear the mentat firmness in his voice, that deep sincerity of pronouncement. The pattern fell into place without a chink. She took two deep breaths and triggered the mnemonic trance, rolled the data through her mind, came out of the trance and opened her eyes. It was done while Farad'n moved from in front of her to a position within half a step of Idaho -- a space of no more than three steps.
    "Say no more, Duncan," Jessica said, and she thought mournfully of how Leto had warned her against Bene Gesserit conditioning.
    Idaho, about to speak, closed his mouth.
    "I command here," Farad'n said. "Continue, mentat." 
    Idaho remained silent.
    Farad'n half turned to study Jessica.
    She stared at a point on the far wall, reviewing what Idaho and the trance had built. The Bene Gesserit hadn't abandoned the Atreides line, of course. But they wanted control of a Kwisatz Haderach and they'd invested too much in the long breeding program. They wanted the open clash between Atreides and Corrino, a situation where they could step in as arbiters. And Duncan was right. They'd emerge with control of both Ghanima and Farad'n. It was the only compromise possible. The wonder was that Alia hadn't seen it. Jessica swallowed past a tightness in her throat. Alia . . . Abomination! Ghanima was right to pity her. But who was left to pity Ghanima?
    "The Sisterhood has promised to put you on the throne with Ghanima as your mate," Jessica said.
    Farad'n took a backward step. Did the witch read minds?
    "They worked secretly and not through your mother," Jessica said. "They told you I was not privy to their plan." 
    Jessica read revelation in Farad'n's face. How open he was. But it was true, the whole structure. Idaho had demonstrated masterful abilities as a mentat in seeing through to the fabric on the limited data available to him.
    "So they played a double game and told you," Farad'n said.
    "They told me nothing of this," Jessica said. "Duncan was correct: they tricked me." She nodded to herself. It had been a classic delaying action in the Sisterhood's traditional pattern -- a reasonable story, easily accepted because it squared with what one might believe of their motives. But they wanted Jessica out of the way -- a flawed sister who'd failed them once.
    Tyekanik moved to Farad'n's side. "My Lord, these two are too dangerous to --"
    "Wait a bit, Tyek," Farad'n said. "There are wheels within wheels here." He faced Jessica. "We've had reasons to believe that Alia might offer herself as my bride."
    Idaho gave an involuntary start, controlled himself. Blood began dripping from his left wrist where the shigawire had cut.
    Jessica allowed herself a small, eye-widening response. She who'd known the original Leto as lover, father of her children, confidant and friend, saw his trait of cold reasoning filtered now through the twistings of an Abomination. 
    "Will you accept?" Idaho asked. 
    "It is being considered."
    "Duncan, I told you to be silent," Jessica said. She addressed Farad'n. "Her price was two inconsequential deaths -- the two of us."
    "We suspected treachery," Farad'n said. "Wasn't it your son who said 'treachery breeds treachery?' "
    "The Sisterhood is out to control both Atreides and Corrino," Jessica said. "Isn't that obvious?"
    "We're toying now with the idea of accepting your offer, Lady Jessica, but Duncan Idaho should be sent back to his loving wife."
    Pain is a function of nerves, Idaho reminded himself. Pain comes as light comes to the eyes. Effort comes from the muscles, not from nerves. It was an old mentat drill and he completed it in the space of one breath, flexed his right wrist and severed an artery against the shigawire.
    Tyekanik leaped to the chair, hit its trip lock to release the bindings, shouted for medical aid. It was revealing that assistants came swarming at once through doors hidden in wall panels.
    There was always a bit of foolishness in Duncan, Jessica thought.
    Farad'n studied Jessica a moment while the medics ministered to Idaho. "I didn't say I was going to accept his Alia." 
    "That's not why he cut his wrist," Jessica said. 
    "Oh? I thought he was simply removing himself." 
    "You're not that stupid," Jessica said. "Stop pretending with me."
    He smiled. "I'm well aware that Alia would destroy me. Not even the Bene Gesserit could expect me to accept her." 
    Jessica bent a weighted stare upon Farad'n. What was this young scion of House Corrino? He didn't play the fool well. Again, she recalled Leto's words that she'd encounter an interesting student. And The Preacher wanted this as well, Idaho said. She wished she'd met this Preacher.
    "Will you banish Wensicia?" Jessica asked. 
    "It seems a reasonable bargain," Farad'n said.
    Jessica glanced at Idaho. The medics had finished with him. Less dangerous restraints held him in the floater chair. 
    "Mentats should beware of absolutes," she said. 
    "I'm tired," Idaho said. "You've no idea how tired I am." 
    "When it's overexploited, even loyalty wears out finally," Farad'n said.
    Again Jessica shot that measuring stare at him.
    Farad'n, seeing this, thought: In time she'll know me for certain and that could be valuable. A renegade Bene Gesserit of my own! It's the one thing her son had that I don't have. Let her get only a glimpse of me now. She can see the rest later.
    "A fair exchange," Farad'n said. "I accept your offer on your terms." He signaled the mute against the wall with a complex flickering of fingers. The mute nodded. Farad'n bent to the chair's controls, released Jessica.
    Tyekanik asked: "My Lord, are you sure?" 
    "Isn't it what we discussed?" Farad'n asked.
    "Yes, but . . ."
    Farad'n chuckled, addressed Jessica. "Tyek suspects my sources. But one learns from books and reels only that certain things can be done. Actual learning requires that you do those things."
    Jessica mused on this as she lifted herself from the chair. Her mind returned to Farad'n's hand signals. He had an Atreides-style battle language! It spoke of careful analysis. Someone here was consciously copying the Atreides.
    "Of course," Jessica said, "you'll want me to teach you as the Bene Gesserit are taught."
    Farad'n beamed at her. "The one offer I cannot resist," he said.

= = = = = =

The password was given to me by a man who died in the dungeons of Arrakeen. You see, that is where I got this ring in the shape of a tortoise. It was in the suk outside the city where I was hidden by the rebels. The password? Oh, that has been changed many times since then. It was "Persistence." And the countersign was "Tortoise." It got me out of there alive. That's why I bought this ring: a reminder.
-Tagir Mohandis: Conversations with a Friend

    Leto was far out on the sand when he heard the worm behind him, coming to his thumper there and the dusting of spice he'd spread around the dead tigers. There was a good omen for this beginning of their plan: worms were scarce enough in these parts most times. The worm was not essential, but it helped. There would be no need for Ghanima to explain a missing body.
    By this time he knew that Ghanima had worked herself into the belief that he was dead. Only a tiny, isolated capsule of awareness would remain to her, a walled-off memory which could be recalled by words uttered in the ancient language shared only by the two of them in all of this universe. Secher Nbiw. If she heard those words: Golden Path . . . only then would she remember him. Until then, he was dead.
    Now Leto felt truly alone.
    He moved with the random walk which made only those sounds natural to the desert. Nothing in his passage would tell that worm back there that human flesh moved here. It was a way of walking so deeply conditioned in him that he didn't need to think about it. The feet moved of themselves, no measurable rhythm to their pacing. Any sound his feet made could be ascribed to the wind, to gravity. No human passed here.
    When the worm had done its work behind him, Leto crouched behind a dune's slipface and peered back toward The Attendant. Yes, he was far enough. He planted a thumper and summoned his transportation. The worm came swiftly, giving him barely enough time to position himself before it engulfed the thumper. As it passed, he went up its side on the Maker hooks, opened the sensitive leading edge of a ring, and turned the mindless beast southeastward. It was a small worm, but strong. He could sense the strength in its twisting as it hissed across the dunes. There was a following breeze and he felt the heat of their passage, the friction which the worm converted to the beginnings of spice within itself.
    As the worm moved, his mind moved. Stilgar had taken him up for his first worm journey. Leto had only to let his memory flow and he could hear Stilgar's voice: calm and precise, full of politeness from another age. Not for Stilgar the threatening staggers of a Fremen drunk on spice-liquor. Not for Stilgar the loud voice and bluster of these times. No -- Stilgar had his duties. He was an instructor of royalty: "In the olden times, the birds were named for their songs. Each wind had its name. A six-klick wind was called a Pastaza, a twenty-klick wind was Cueshma, and a hundred-klick wind was Heinali -- Heinali, the man-pusher. Then there was the wind of the demon in the open desert: Hulasikali Wala, the wind that eats flesh."
    And Leto, who'd already known these things, had nodded his gratitude at the wisdom of such instruction.
    But Stilgar's voice could be filled with many valuable things.
    "There were in olden times certain tribes which were known to be water hunters. They were called Iduali, which meant 'water insects,' because those people wouldn't hesitate to steal the water of another Fremen. If they caught you alone in the desert they would not even leave you the water of your flesh. There was this place where they lived: Sietch Jacurutu. That's where the other tribes banded and wiped out the Iduali. That was a long time ago, before Kynes even -- in my great-great-grandfather's days. And from that day to this, no Fremen has gone to Jacurutu. It is tabu." 
    Thus had Leto been reminded of knowledge which lay in his memory. It had been an important lesson about the working of memory. A memory was not enough, even for one whose past was as multiform as his, unless its use was known and its value revealed to judgment. Jacurutu would have water, a wind trap, all of the attributes of a Fremen sietch, plus the value without compare that no Fremen would venture there. Many of the young would not even know such a place as Jacurutu had ever existed. Oh, they would know about Fondak, of course, but that was a smuggler place.
    It was a perfect place for the dead to hide -- among the smugglers and the dead of another age. 
    Thank you, Stilgar.
    The worm tired before dawn. Leto slid off its side and watched it dig itself into the dunes, moving slowly in the familiar pattern of the creatures. It would go deep and sulk. 
    I must wait out the day, he thought.
    He stood atop a dune and scanned all around: emptiness, emptiness, emptiness. Only the wavering track of the vanished worm broke the pattern.
    The slow cry of a nightbird challenged the first green line of light along the eastern horizon. Leto dug himself into the sand's concealment, inflated a stilltent around his body and sent the tip of a sandsnorkel questing for air.
    For a long time before sleep came, he lay in the enforced darkness thinking about the decision he and Ghanima had made. It had not been an easy decision, especially for Ghanima. He had not told her all of his vision, nor all of the reasoning derived from it. It was a vision, not a dream, in his thinking now. But the peculiarity of this thing was that he saw it as a vision of a vision. If any argument existed to convince him that his father still lived, it lay in that vision-vision.
    The life of the prophet locks us into his vision, Leto thought. And a prophet could only break out of the vision by creating his death at variance with that vision. That was how it appeared in Leto's doubled vision, and he pondered this as it related to the choice he had made. Poor Baptist John, he thought. If he'd only had the courage to die some other way . . . But perhaps his choice had been the bravest one. How do I know what alternatives faced him? I know what alternatives faced my father, though.
    Leto sighed. To turn his back on his father was like betraying a god. But the Atreides Empire needed shaking up. It had fallen into the worst of Paul's vision. How casually it obliterated men. It was done without a second thought. The mainspring of a religious insanity had been wound tight and left ticking. 
    And we're locked in my father's vision.
    A way out of that insanity lay along the Golden Path, Leto knew. His father had seen it. But humanity might come out of that Golden Path and look back down it at Muad'Dib's time, seeing that as a better age. Humankind had to experience the alternative to Muad'Dib, though, or never understand its own myths. 
    Security . . . peace . . . prosperity . . .
    Given the choice, there was little doubt what most citizens of this Empire would select.
    Though they hate me, he thought. Though Ghani hate me. 
    His right hand itched, and he thought of the terrible glove in his vision-vision. It will be, he thought. Yes, it will be.
    Arrakis, give me strength, he prayed. His planet remained strong and alive beneath him and around him. Its sand pressed close against the stilltent. Dune was a giant counting its massed riches. It was a beguiling entity, both beautiful and grossly ugly. The only coin its merchants really knew was the bloodpulse of their own power, no matter how that power had been amassed. They possessed this planet the way a man might possess a captive mistress, or the way the Bene Gesserits possessed their Sisters. 
    No wonder Stilgar hated the merchant-priests. 
    Thank you, Stilgar.
    Leto recalled then the beauties of the old sietch ways, the life lived before the coming of the Imperium's technocracy, and his mind flowed as he knew Stilgar's dreams flowed. Before the glow-globes and lasers, before the ornithopters and spice-crawlers, there'd been another kind of life: brown-skinned mothers with babies on their hips, lamps which burned spice-oil amidst a heavy fragrance of cinnamon, Naibs who persuaded their people while knowing none could be compelled. It had been a darkswarming of life in rocky burrows . . . 
    A terrible glove will restore the balance, Leto thought.
    Presently, he slept.

= = = = = =

I saw his blood and a piece of his robe which had been ripped by sharp claws. His sister reports vividly of the tigers, the sureness of their attack. We have questioned one of the plotters, and others are dead or in custody. Everything points to a Corrino plot. A Truthsayer has attested to this testimony.
-Stilgar's Report to the Landsraad Commission

    Farad'n studied Duncan Idaho through the spy circuit, seeking a clue to that strange man's behavior. It was shortly after noon and Idaho waited outside the quarters assigned to the Lady Jessica, seeking audience with her. Would she see him? She'd know they were spied upon, of course. But would she see him?
    Around Farad'n lay the room where Tyekanik had guided the training of the Laza tigers -- an illegal room, really, filled as it was with forbidden instruments from the hands of the Tleilaxu and Ixians. By the movement of switches at his right hand, Farad'n could look at Idaho from six different angles, or shift to the interior of the Lady Jessica's suite where the spying facilities were equally sophisticated.
    Idaho's eyes bothered Farad'n. Those pitted metal orbs which the Tleilaxu had given their ghola in the regrowth tanks marked their possessor as profoundly different from other humans. Farad'n touched his own eyelids, feeling the hard surfaces of the permanent contact lenses which concealed the total blue of his spice addiction. Idaho's eyes must record a different universe. How could it be otherwise? It almost tempted Farad'n to seek out the Tleilaxu surgeons and answer that question himself. 
    Why did Idaho try to kill himself?
    Was that really what he'd tried? He must've known we wouldn't permit it.
    Idaho remained a dangerous question mark.
    Tyekanik wanted to keep him on Salusa or kill him. Perhaps that would be best.
    Farad'n shifted to a frontal view. Idaho sat on a hard bench outside the door to the Lady Jessica's suite. It was a windowless foyer with light wood walls decorated by lance pennants. Idaho had been on that bench more than an hour and appeared ready to wait there forever. Farad'n bent close to the screen. The loyal swordmaster of the Atreides, instructor of Paul Muad'Dib, had been treated kindly by his years on Arrakis. He'd arrived with a youthful spring in his step. A steady spice diet must have helped him, of course. And that marvelous metabolic balance which the Tleilaxu tanks always imparted. Did Idaho really remember his past before the tanks? No other whom the Tleilaxu had revived could claim this. What an enigma this Idaho was!
    The reports of his death were in the library. The Sardaukar who'd slain him reported his prowess: nineteen of their number dispatched by Idaho before he'd fallen. Nineteen Sardaukar! His flesh had been well worth sending to the regrowth tanks. But the Tleilaxu had made a mentat out of him. What a strange creature lived in that regrown flesh. How did it feel to be a human computer in addition to all of his other talents? 
    Why did he try to kill himself?
    Farad'n knew his own talents and held few illusions about them. He was a historian-archaeologist and judge of men. Necessity had forced him to become an expert on those who would serve him -- necessity and a careful study of the Atreides. He saw it as the price always demanded of aristocracy. To rule required accurate and incisive judgments about those who wielded your power. More than one ruler had fallen through mistakes and excesses of his underlings.
    Careful study of the Atreides revealed a superb talent in choosing servants. They'd known how to maintain loyalty, how to keep a fine edge on the ardor of their warriors. 
    Idaho was not acting in character. 
    Why?
    Farad'n squinted his eyes, trying to see past the skin of this man. There was a sense of duration about Idaho, a feeling that he could not be worn down. He gave the impression of being self-contained, an organized and firmly integrated whole. The Tleilaxu tanks had set something more than human into motion. Farad'n sensed this. There was a self-renewing movement about the man, as though he acted in accordance with immutable laws, beginning anew at every ending. He moved in a fixed orbit with an endurance about him like that of a planet around a star. He would respond to pressure without breaking -- merely shifting his orbit slightly but not really changing anything basic.
    Why did he cut his wrist?
    Whatever his motive, he had done it for the Atreides, for his ruling House. The Atreides were the star of his orbit.
    Somehow he believes that my holding the Lady Jessica here strengthens the Atreides.
    And Farad'n reminded himself: A mentat thinks this.
    It gave the thought an added depth. Mentats made mistakes, but not often.
    Having come to this conclusion, Farad'n almost summoned his aides to have them send the Lady Jessica away with Idaho. He poised himself on the point of acting, withdrew.
    Both of those people -- the ghola-mentat and the Bene Gesserit witch -- remained counters of unknown denomination in this game of power. Idaho must be sent back because that would certainly stir up troubles on Arrakis. Jessica must be kept here, drained of her strange knowledge to benefit House Corrino.
    Farad'n knew it was a subtle and deadly game he played. But he had prepared himself for this possibility over the years, ever since he'd realized that he was more intelligent, more sensitive than those around him. It had been a frightening discovery for a child, and he knew the library had been his refuge as well as his teacher.
    Doubts ate at him now, though, and he wondered if he was quite up to this game. He'd alienated his mother, lost her counsel, but her decisions had always been dangerous to him. Tigers! Their training had been an atrocity and their use had been stupidity. How easy they were to trace! She should be thankful to suffer nothing more than banishment. The Lady Jessica's advice had fitted his needs with a lovely precision there. She must be made to divulge the way of that Atreides thinking.
    His doubts began to fade away. He thought of his Sardaukar once more growing tough and resilient through the rigorous training and the denial of luxury which he commanded. His Sardaukar legions remained small, but once more they were a man-to-man match for the Fremen. That served little purpose as long as the limits imposed by the Treaty of Arrakeen governed the relative size of the forces. Fremen could overwhelm him by their numbers -- unless they were tied up and weakened by civil war.
    It was too soon for a battle of Sardaukar against Fremen. He needed time. He needed new allies from among the discontented Houses Major and the newly powerful from the Houses Minor. He needed access to CHOAM financing. He needed the time for his Sardaukar to grow stronger and the Fremen to grow weaker.
    Again Farad'n looked at the screen which revealed the patient ghola. Why did Idaho want to see the Lady Jessica at this time? He would know they were spied upon, that every word, every gesture would be recorded and analyzed. 
    Why?
    Farad'n glanced away from the screen to the ledge beside his control console. In the pale electronic light he could make out the spools which contained the latest reports from Arrakis. His spies were thorough; he had to give them credit. There was much to give him hope and pleasure in those reports. He closed his eyes, and the high points of those reports passed through his mind in the oddly editorial form to which he'd reduced the spools for his own uses:
    As the planet is made fertile, Fremen are freed of land pressures and their new communities lose the traditional sietch-stronghold character. From infancy, in the old sietch culture, the Fremen was taught by the rota: "Like the knowledge of your own being, the sietch forms a firm base from which you move out into the world and into the universe. "
    The traditional Fremen says: "Look to the Massif," meaning that the master science is the Law. But the new social structure is loosening those old legal restrictions; discipline grows lax. The new Fremen leaders know only their Low Catechism of ancestry plus the history which is camouflaged in the myth structure of their songs. People of the new communities are more volatile, more open; they quarrel more often and are less responsive to authority. The old sietch folk are more disciplined, more inclined to group actions and they tend to work harder; they are more careful of their resources. The old folk still believe that the orderly society is the fulfillment of the individual. The young grow away from this belief. Those remnants of the older culture which remain look at the young and say: "The death wind has etched away their past."
    Farad'n liked the pointedness of his own summary. The new diversity on Arrakis could only bring violence. He had the essential concepts firmly etched into the spools:
    The religion of Muad'Dib is based firmly in the old Fremen sietch cultural tradition while the new culture moves farther and farther from those disciplines.
    Not for the first time, Farad'n asked himself why Tyekanik had embraced that religion. Tyekanik behaved oddly in his new morality. He seemed utterly sincere, but carried along as though against his will. Tyekanik was like one who had stepped into the whirlwind to test it and had been caught up by forces beyond his control. Tyekanik's conversion annoyed Farad'n by its characterless completeness. It was a reversion to very old Sardaukar ways. He warned that the young Fremen might yet revert in a similar way, that the inborn, ingrained traditions would prevail.
    Once more Farad'n thought about those report spools. They told of a disquieting thing: the persistence of a cultural remnant from the most ancient Fremen times -- "The Water of Conception." The amniotic fluid of the newborn was saved at birth, distilled into the first water fed to that child. The traditional form required a godmother to serve the water, saying: "Here is the water of thy conception." Even the young Fremen still followed this tradition with their own newborn. 
    The water of thy conception.
    Farad'n found himself revolted by the idea of drinking water distilled from the amniotic fluid which had borne him. And he thought about the surviving twin, Ghanima, her mother dead when she'd taken that strange water. Had she reflected later upon that odd link with her past? Probably not. She'd been raised Fremen, What was natural and acceptable to Fremen had been natural and acceptable to her.
    Momentarily Farad'n regretted the death of Leto II. It would have been interesting to discuss this point with him. Perhaps an opportunity would come to discuss it with Ghanima. 
    Why did Idaho cut his wrists?
    The question persisted every time he glanced at the spy screen. Again doubts assailed Farad'n. He longed for the ability to sink into the mysterious spice trance as Paul Muad'Dib had done, there to seek out the future and know the answers to his questions. No matter how much spice he ingested, though, his ordinary awareness persisted in its singular flow of now, reflecting a universe of uncertainties.
    The spy screen showed a servant opening the Lady Jessica's door. The woman beckoned Idaho, who arose from the bench and went through the door. The servant would file a complete report later, but Farad'n, his curiosity once more fully aroused, touched another switch on his console, watched as Idaho entered the sitting room of the Lady Jessica's quarters.
    How calm and contained the mentat appeared. And how fathomless were his ghola eyes.

= = = = = =

Above all else, the mentat must be a generalist, not a specialist. It is wise to have decisions of great moment monitored by generalists. Experts and specialists lead you quickly into chaos. They are a source of useless nit picking, the ferocious quibble over a comma. The mentat-generalist, on the other hand, should bring to decision-making a healthy common sense. He must not cut himself off from the broad sweep of what is happening in his universe. He must remain capable of saying: "There's no real mystery about this at the moment. This is what we want now. It may prove wrong later, but we'll correct that when we come to it." The mentat-generalist must understand that anything which we can identify as our universe is merely part of larger phenomena. But the expert looks backward; he looks into the narrow standards of his own specialty. The generalist looks outward; he looks for living principles, knowing full well that such principles change, that they develop. It is to the characteristics of change itself that the mentat-generalist must look. There can be no permanent catalogue of such change, no handbook or manual. You must look at it with as few preconceptions as possible, asking yourself: "Now what is this thing doing?"
-The Mentat Handbook

    It was the day of the Kwisatz Haderach, the first Holy Day of those who followed Muad'Dib. It recognized the deified Paul Atreides as that person who was everywhere simultaneously, the male Bene Gesserit who mingled both male and female ancestry in an inseparable power to become the One-with-All. The faithful called this day Ayil, the Sacrifice, to commemorate the death which made his presence "real in all places."
    The Preacher chose the early morning of this day to appear once more in the plaza of Alia's temple, defying the order for his arrest which everyone knew had been issued. The delicate truce prevailed between Alia's Priesthood and those desert tribes which had rebelled, but the presence of this truce could be felt as a tangible thing which moved everyone in Arrakeen with uneasiness. The Preacher did not dispel that mood.
    It was the twenty-eighth day of official mourning for Muad'Dib's son, six days following the memorial rite at Old Pass which had been delayed by the rebellion. Even the fighting had not stopped the Hajj, though. The Preacher knew the plaza would be heavily thronged on this day. Most pilgrims tried to time their stay on Arrakis to cross Ayil, "to feel then the Holy Presence of the Kwisatz Haderach on His day."
    The Preacher entered the plaza at first light, finding the place already thronging with the faithful. He kept a hand lightly on the shoulder of his young guide, sensing the cynical pride in the lad's walk. Now, when the Preacher approached, people noticed every nuance of his behavior. Such attention was not entirely distasteful to the young guide. The Preacher merely accepted it as a necessity.
    Taking his stance on the third of the Temple's steps. The Preacher waited for the hush to come. When silence had spread like a wave through the throng and the hurrying footsteps of others come to listen could be heard at the plaza's limits, he cleared his throat. It was still morning-cold around him and lights had not yet come down into the plaza from the building tops. He felt the grey hush of the great square as he began to speak.
    "I have come to give homage and to preach in the memory of Leto Atreides II," he said, calling out in that strong voice so reminiscent of a wormsman from the desert. "I do it in compassion for all who suffer. I say to you what the dead Leto has learned, that tomorrow has not yet happened and may never happen. This moment here is the only observable time and place for us in our universe. I tell you to savor this moment and understand what it teaches. I tell you to learn that a government's growth and its death are apparent in the growth and death of its citizens." 
    A disturbed murmur passed through the plaza. Did he mock the death of Leto II? They wondered if Priest Guards would rush out now and arrest The Preacher.
    Alia knew there would be no such interruption of The Preacher. It was her order that he be left unmolested on this day. She had disguised herself in a good stillsuit with a moisture mask to conceal her nose and mouth, and a common hooded robe to hide her hair. She stood in the second row beneath The Preacher, watching him carefully. Was this Paul? The years might have changed him thus. And he had always been superb with Voice, a fact which made it difficult to identify him by his speech. Still, this Preacher made his voice do what he wanted. Paul could not have done it better. She felt that she had to know his identity before she could act against him. How his words dazzled her!
    She sensed no irony in The Preacher's statement. He was using the seductive attraction of definite sentences uttered with a driving sincerity. People might stumble only momentarily at his meanings, realizing that he had meant them to stumble, teaching them in this fashion. Indeed, he picked up the crowd's response, saying: "Irony often masks the inability to think beyond one's assumptions. I am not being ironic. Ghanima has said to you that the blood of her brother cannot be washed off. I concur.
    "It will be said that Leto has gone where his father went, has done what his father did. Muad'Dib's Church says he chose in behalf of his own humanity a course which might appear absurd and foolhardy, but which history will validate. That history is being rewritten even now.
    "I say to you that there is another lesson to be learned from these lives and their endings."
    Alia, alert to every nuance, asked herself why The Preacher said endings instead of deaths. Was he saying that one or both were not truly dead? How could that be? A Truthsayer had confirmed Ghanima's story. What was this Preacher doing, then? Was he making a statement of myth or reality?
    "Note this other lesson well!" The Preacher thundered, lifting his arms. "If you would possess your humanity, let go of the universe!"
    He lowered his arms, pointed his empty sockets directly at Alia. He seemed to be speaking intimately to her, an action so obvious that several around her turned to peer inquiringly in her direction. Alia shivered at the power in him. This could be Paul. It could!
    "But I realize that humans cannot bear very much reality," he said. "Most lives are a flight from selfhood. Most prefer the truths of the stable. You stick your heads into the stanchions and munch contentedly until you die. Others use you for their purposes. Not once do you live outside the stable to lift your head and be your own creature. Muad'Dib came to tell you about that. Without understanding his message, you cannot revere him!"
    Some in the throng, possibly a Priest in disguise, could stand no more. His hoarse male voice was lifted in a shout: "You don't live the life of Muad'Dib! How dare you to tell others how they must revere him!"
    "Because he's dead!" The Preacher bellowed.
    Alia turned to see who had challenged The Preacher. The man remained hidden from her, but his voice came over the intervening heads in another shout: "If you believe him truly dead, then you are alone from this time forward!"
    Surely it was a Priest, Alia thought. But she failed to recognize the voice.
    "I come only to ask a simple question," The Preacher said. "Is Muad'Dib's death to be followed by the moral suicide of all men? Is that the inevitable aftermath of a Messiah?" 
    "Then you admit him Messiah!" the voice from the crowd shouted.
    "Why not, since I'm the prophet of his times?" The Preacher asked.
    There was such calm assurance in his tone and manner that even his challenger fell silent. The crowd responded with a disturbed murmur, a low animal sound.
    "Yes," The Preacher repeated, "I am the prophet of these times."
    Alia, concentrating on him, detected the subtle inflections of Voice. He'd certainly controlled the crowd. Was he Bene Gesserit trained? Was this another ploy of the Missionaria Protectiva? Not Paul at all, but just another part of the endless power game?
    "I articulate the myth and the dream!" The Preacher shouted. "I am the physician who delivers the child and announces that the child is born. Yet I come to you at a time of death. Does that not disturb you? It should shake your souls!"
    Even as she felt anger at his words, Alia understood the pointed way of his speech. With others, she found herself edging closer up the steps, crowding toward this tall man in desert garb. His young guide caught her attention: how bright-eyed and saucy the lad appeared! Would Muad'Dib employ such a cynical youth?
    "I mean to disturb you!" The Preacher shouted. "It is my intention! I come here to combat the fraud and illusion of your conventional, institutionalized religion. As with all such religions, your institution moves toward cowardice, it moves toward mediocrity, inertia, and self-satisfaction." 
    Angry murmurs began to arise in the center of the throng.
    Alia felt the tensions and gloatingly wondered if there might not be a riot. Could The Preacher handle these tensions? If not, he could die right here!
    "That Priest who challenged me!" The Preacher called, pointing into the crowd.
    He knows! Alia thought. A thrill ran through her, almost sexual in its undertones. This Preacher played a dangerous game, but he played it consummately.
    "You, Priest in your mufti," The Preacher called, "you are a chaplain to the self-satisfied. I come not to challenge Muad'Dib but to challenge you! Is your religion real when it costs you nothing and carries no risk? Is your religion real when you fatten upon it? Is your religion real when you commit atrocities in its name? Whence comes your downward degeneration from the original revelation? Answer me, Priest!"
    But the challenger remained silent. And Alia noted that the crowd once more was listening with avid submission to The Preacher's every word. By attacking the Priesthood, he had their sympathy! And if her spies were correct, most of the pilgrims and Fremen on Arrakis believed this man was Muad'Dib.
    "The son of Muad'Dib risked!" The Preacher shouted, and Alia heard tears in his voice. "Muad'Dib risked! They paid their price! And what did Muad'Dib achieve? A religion which is doing away with him!"
    How different those words if they come from Paul himself, Alia thought. I must find out! She moved closer up the steps and others moved with her. She pressed through the throng until she could almost reach out and touch this mysterious prophet. She smelled the desert on him, a mixture of spice and flint. Both The Preacher and his young guide were dusty, as though they'd recently come from the bled. She could see where The Preacher's hands were deeply veined along the skin protruding from the wrist seals of his stillsuit. She could see that one finger of his left hand had worn a ring; the indentation remained. Paul had worn a ring on that finger: the Atreides Hawk which now reposed in Sietch Tabr. Leto would have worn it had he lived . . . or had she permitted him to ascend the throne.
    Again The Preacher aimed his empty sockets at Alia, spoke intimately, but with a voice which carried across the throng.
    "Muad'Dib showed you two things: a certain future and an uncertain future. With full awareness, he confronted the ultimate uncertainty of the larger universe. He stepped off blindly from his position on this world. He showed us that men must do this always, choosing the uncertain instead of the certain." His voice, Alia noted, took on a pleading tone at the end of this statement.
    Alia glanced around, slipped a hand onto the hilt of her crysknife. If I killed him right now, what would they do? Again, she felt a thrill rush through her. If I killed him and revealed myself, denouncing The Preacher as impostor and heretic! 
    But what if they proved it was Paul?
    Someone pushed Alia even closer to him. She felt herself enthralled by his presence even as she fought to still her anger. Was this Paul? Gods below! What could she do?
    "Why has another Leto been taken from us?" The Preacher demanded. There was real pain in his voice. "Answer me if you can! Ahhhh, their message is clear: abandon certainty." He repeated it in a rolling stentorian shout: "Abandon certainty! That's life's deepest command. That's what life's all about. We're a probe into the unknown, into the uncertain. Why can't you hear Muad'Dib? If certainty is knowing absolutely an absolute future, then that's only death disguised! Such a future becomes now! He showed you this!"
    With a terrifying directness The Preacher reached out, grabbed Alia's arm. It was done without any groping or hesitation. She tried to pull away, but he held her in a painful grip, speaking directly into her face as those around them edged back in confusion. 
    "What did Paul Atreides tell you, woman?" he demanded.
    How does he know I'm a woman? she asked herself. She wanted to sink into her inner lives, ask their protection, but the world within remained frighteningly silent, mesmerized by this figure from their past.
    "He told you that completion equals death!" The Preacher shouted. "Absolute prediction is completion . . . is death!" 
    She tried to pry his fingers away. She wanted to grab her knife and slash him away from her, but dared not. She had never felt this daunted in all of her life.
    The Preacher lifted his chin to speak over her to the crowd, shouted: "I give you Muad'Dib's words! He said, 'I'm going to rub your faces in things you try to avoid. I don't find it strange that all you want to believe is only that which comforts you. How else do humans invent the traps which betray us into mediocrity? How else do we define cowardice?' That's what Muad'Dib told you!" 
    Abruptly he released Alia's arm, thrust her into the crowd. She would have fallen but for the press of people supporting her.
    "To exist is to stand out, away from the background," The Preacher said. "You aren't thinking or really existing unless you're willing to risk even your own sanity in the judgment of your existence."
    Stepping down. The Preacher once more took Alia's arm -- no faltering or hesitation. He was gentler this time, though. Leaning close, he pitched his voice for her ears alone, said: "Stop trying to pull me once more into the background, sister."
    Then, hand on his young guide's shoulder, he stepped into the throng. Way was made for the strange pair. Hands reached out to touch The Preacher, but people reached with an awesome tenderness, fearful of what they might find beneath that dusty Fremen robe.
    Alia stood alone in her shock as the throng moved out behind The Preacher.
    Certainty filled her. It was Paul. No doubt remained. It was her brother. She felt what the crowd felt. She had stood in the sacred presence and now her universe tumbled all about her. She wanted to run after him, pleading for him to save her from herself, but she could not move. While others pressed to follow The Preacher and his guide, she stood intoxicated with an absolute despair, a distress so deep that she could only tremble with it, unable to command her own muscles.
    What will I do? What will I do? she asked herself.
    Now she did not even have Duncan to lean upon, nor her mother. The inner lives remained silent. There was Ghanima, held securely under guard within the Keep, but Alia could not bring herself to take this distress to the surviving twin.
    Everyone has turned against me. What can I do?

= = = = = =

The one-eyed view of our universe says you must not look far afield for problems. Such problems may never arrive. Instead, tend to the wolf within your fences. The packs ranging outside may not even exist.
-The Azhar Book; Shamra I:4

    Jessica awaited Idaho at the window of her sitting room. It was a comfortable room with soft divans and old-fashioned chairs. There wasn't a suspensor in any of her rooms, and the glowglobes were crystal from another age. Her window overlooked a courtyard garden one story down.
    She heard the servant open the door, then the sound of Idaho's footsteps on the wood floor, then on the carpet. She listened without turning, kept her gaze upon the dappled light of the courtyard's green floor. The silent, fearful warfare of her emotions must be suppressed now. She took the deep breaths of her prana-bindu training, felt the outflow of enforced calmness.
    The high sun threw its searchlight along a dustbeam into the courtyard, highlighting the silver wheel of a spiderweb stretched in the branches of a linden tree which reached almost to her window. It was cool within her quarters, but outside the sealed window there was air which trembled with petrified heat. Castle Corrino sat in a stagnant place which belied the greens in her courtyard. 
    She heard Idaho stop directly behind her.
    Without turning, she said: "The gift of words is the gift of deception and illusion, Duncan. Why do you wish words with me?" 
    "It may be that only one of us will survive," he said.
    "And you wish me to make a good report of your efforts?" She turned, saw how calmly he stood there, watching her with those grey metal eyes which held no center of focus. How blank they were!
    "Duncan, is it possible that you're jealous of your place in history?"
    She spoke accusingly and remembered as she spoke that other time when she'd confronted this man. He'd been drunk then, set to spy upon her, and was torn by conflicting obligations. But that had been a pre-ghola Duncan. This was not the same man at all. This one was not divided in his actions, not torn.
    He proved her summation by smiling. "History holds its own court and delivers its own judgments," he said. "I doubt that I'll be concerned when my judgment's handed down." 
    "Why are you here?" she asked.
    "For the same reason you're here, My Lady." 
    No outward sign betrayed the shocking power of those simple words, but she reflected at a furious pace: Does he really know why I'm here? How could he? Only Ghanima knew. Then had he enough data for a mentat computation? That was possible. And what if he said something to give her away? Would he do that if he shared her reason for being here? He must know their every movement, every word was being spied upon by Farad'n or his servants.
    "House Atreides has come to a bitter crossroads," she said. "Family turned against itself. You were among my Duke's most loyal men, Duncan. When the Baron Harkonnen --" 
    "Let us not speak of Harkonnens," he said, "That was another age and your Duke is dead." And he wondered: Can't she guess that Paul revealed the Harkonnen blood in the Atreides? What a risk that had been for Paul, but it had bound Duncan Idaho even more firmly to him. The trust in the revelation had been a coin almost too great to imagine. Paul had known what the Baron's people had done to Idaho.
    "House Atreides is not dead," Jessica said.
    "What is House Atreides?" he asked. "Are you House Atreides? Is it Alia? Ghanima? Is it the people who serve this House? I look at those people and they bear the stamp of a travail beyond words! How can they be Atreides? Your son said it rightly: 'Travail and persecution are the lot of all who follow me.' I would break myself away from that, My Lady." 
    "Have you really gone over to Farad'n?"
    "Isn't that what you've done, My Lady? Didn't you come here to convince Farad'n that a marriage to Ghanima would solve all of our problems?"
    Does he really think that? she wondered. Or is he talking for the watchful spies?
    "House Atreides has always been essentially an idea," she said. "You know that, Duncan. We bought loyalty with loyalty."
    "Service to the people," Idaho sneered. "Ahhh, many's the time I've heard your Duke say it. He must lie uneasy in his grave, My Lady." 
    "Do you really think us fallen that low?"
    "My lady, did you not know that there are Fremen rebels -- they call themselves 'Marquis of the Inner Desert' -- who curse House Atreides and even Muad'Dib?"
    "I heard Farad'n's report," she said, wondering where he was leading this conversation and to what point.
    "More than that, My Lady. More than Farad'n's report. I've heard their curse myself. Here's the way of it: 'Burning be on you, Atreides! You shall have no souls, nor spirits, nor bodies, nor shades nor magic nor bones, nor hair nor utterances nor words. You shall have no grave, nor house nor hole nor tomb. You shall have no garden, nor tree nor bush. You shall have no water, nor bread nor light nor fire. You shall have no children, nor family nor heirs nor tribe. You shall have no head, nor arms nor legs nor gait nor seed. You shall have no seats on any planet. Your souls shall not be permitted to come up from the depths, and they shall never be among those permitted to live upon the earth. On no day shall you behold Shai-Hulud, but you shall be bound and fettered in the nethermost abomination and your souls shall never enter into the glorious light for ever and ever.' That's the way of the curse, My Lady. Can you imagine such hatred from Fremen? They consign all Atreides to the left hand of the damned, to the Woman-Sun which is full of burning."
    Jessica allowed herself a shudder. Idaho undoubtedly had delivered those words with the same voice in which he'd heard the original curse. Why did he expose this to House Corrino? She could picture an outraged Fremen, terrible in his anger, standing before his tribe to vent that ancient curse. Why did Idaho want Farad'n to hear it?
    "You make a strong argument for the marriage of Ghanima and Farad'n," she said.
    "You always did have a single-minded approach to problems," he said. "Ghanima's Fremen. She can marry only one who pays no fai, no tax for protection. House Corrino gave up its entire CHOAM holdings to your son and his heirs. Farad'n exists on Atreides sufferance. And remember when your Duke planted the Hawk flag on Arrakis, remember what he said: 'Here I am; here I remain!' His bones are still there. And Farad'n would have to live on Arrakis, his Sardaukar with him."
    Idaho shook his head at the very thought of such an alliance.
    "There's an old saying that one peels a problem like an onion," she said, her voice cold. How dare he patronize me? Unless he's performing for Farad'n's watchful eyes . . .
    "Somehow, I can't see Fremen and Sardaukar sharing a planet," Idaho said. "That's a layer which doesn't come off the onion."
    She didn't like the thoughts which Idaho's words might arouse in Farad'n and his advisors, spoke sharply: "House Atreides is still the law in this Empire!" And she thought: Does Idaho want Farad'n to believe he can regain the throne without the Atreides?
    "Oh, yes," Idaho said. "I almost forgot. Atreides Law! As translated, of course, by the Priests of the Golden Elixir. I have but to close my eyes and I hear your Duke telling me that real estate is always gained and held by violence or the threat of it. Fortune passes everywhere, as Gurney used to sing it. The end justifies the means? Or do I have my proverbs mixed up? Well, it doesn't matter whether the mailed fist is brandished openly by Fremen legions or Sardaukar, or whether it's hidden in the Atreides Law -- the fist is still there. And the onion layer won't come off, My Lady. You know, I wonder which fist Farad'n will demand?" 
    What is he doing? Jessica wondered. House Corrino would soak up this argument and gloat over it!
    "So you think the Priests wouldn't let Ghanima marry Farad'n?" Jessica ventured, probing to see where Idaho's words might be leading.
    "Let her? Gods below! The Priests will let Alia do whatever she decrees. She could marry Farad'n herself!" 
    Is that where he's fishing? Jessica wondered.
    "No, My Lady," Idaho said. "That's not the issue. This Empire's people cannot distinguish between Atreides government and the government of Beast Rabban. Men die every day in Arrakeen's dungeons. I left because I could not give my sword arm another hour to the Atreides! Don't you understand what I'm saying, why I came here to you as the nearest Atreides representative? The Atreides Empire has betrayed your Duke and your son. I loved your daughter, but she went one way and I went another. If it comes down to it, I'll advise Farad'n to accept Ghanima's hand -- or Alia's -- only on his own terms!"
    Ahhh, he sets the stage for a formal withdrawal with honor from Atreides service, she thought. But these other matters of which he spoke, could he possibly know how well they did her work for her? She scowled at him. "You know spies are listening to every word, don't you?"
    "Spies?" He chuckled. "They listen as I would listen in their place. Don't you know how my loyalties move in a different way? Many's the night I've spent alone in the desert, and the Fremen are right about that place, in the desert, especially at night, you encounter the dangers of hard thinking." 
    "Is that where you heard Fremen curse us?" 
    "Yes. Among the al-Ourouba. At The Preacher's bidding I joined them, My Lady. We call ourselves the Zarr Sadus, those who refuse to submit to the Priests. I am here to make formal announcement to an Atreides that I've removed myself to enemy territory." 
    Jessica studied him, looking for betrayals of minutiae, but Idaho gave no indication that he spoke falsely or with hidden plans. Was it really possible that he'd gone over to Farad'n? She was reminded of her Sisterhood's maxim: In human affairs, nothing remains enduring; all human affairs revolve in a helix, moving around and out. If Idaho had really left the Atreides fold, that would explain his present behavior. He was moving around and out. She had to consider this as a possibility.
    But why had he emphasized that he did The Preacher's bidding?
    Jessica's mind raced and, having considered alternatives, she realized she might have to kill Idaho. The plan upon which she had staked her hopes remained so delicate that nothing could be allowed to interfere with it. Nothing. And Idaho's words hinted that he knew her plan. She gauged their relative positions in the room, moving and turning to place herself in position for a lethal blow.
    "I've always considered the normalizing effect of the faufreluches to be a pillar of our strength," she said. Let him wonder why she shifted their conversation to the system of class distinction. "The Landsraad Council of the Great Houses, the regional Sysselraads, all deserve our --" 
    "You do not distract me," he said.
    And Idaho wondered at how transparent her actions had become. Was it that she had grown lax in concealment, or had he finally breached the walls of her Bene Gesserit training? The latter, he decided, but some of it was in herself -- a changing as she aged. It saddened him to see the small ways the new Fremen differed from the old. The passing of the desert was the passing of something precious to humans and he could not describe this thing, no more than he could describe what had happened to the Lady Jessica.
    Jessica stared at Idaho in open astonishment, not trying to conceal her reaction. Could he read her that easily?
    "You will not slay me," he said. He used the Fremen words of warning: "Don't throw your blood upon my knife." And he thought: I've become very much the Fremen. It gave him a wry sense of continuity to realize how deeply he had accepted the ways of the planet which had harbored his second life. 
    "I think you'd better leave," she said.
    "Not until you accept my withdrawal from Atreides service." 
    "Accepted!" She bit it off. And only after she'd uttered the word did she realize how much pure reflex had gone into this exchange. She needed time to think and reconsider. How had Idaho known what she would do? She did not believe him capable of leaping Time in the spice way.
    Idaho backed away from her until he felt the door behind him. He bowed. "Once more I call you My Lady, and then never again. My advice to Farad'n will be to send you back to Wallach, quietly and quickly, at the earliest practical moment. You are too dangerous a toy to keep around. Although I don't believe he thinks of you as a toy. You are working for the Sisterhood, not for the Atreides. I wonder now if you ever worked for the Atreides. You witches move too deeply and darkly for mere mortals ever to trust." 
    "A ghola considers himself a mere mortal," she jibed. 
    "Compared to you," he said. 
    "Leave!" she ordered.
    "Such is my intention." He slipped out the door, passing the curious stare of the servant who'd obviously been listening.
    It's done, he thought. And they can read it in only one way.

= = = = = =

Only in the realm of mathematics can you understand Muad'Dib's precise view of the future. Thus: first, we postulate any number of point-dimensions in space. (This is the classic n-fold extended aggregate of n dimensions.) With this framework, Time as commonly understood becomes an aggregate of one-dimensional properties. Applying this to the Muad'Dib phenomenon, we find that we either are confronted by new properties of Time or (by reduction through the infinity calculus) we are dealing with separate systems which contain n body properties. For Muad'Dib, we assume the latter. As demonstrated by the reduction, the point dimensions of the n-fold can only have separate existence within different frameworks of Time. Separate dimensions of Time are thus demonstrated to coexist. This being the inescapable case, Muad'Dib's predictions required that he perceive the n-fold not as extended aggregate but as an operation within a single framework. In effect, he froze his universe into that one framework which was his view of Time.
-Palimbasha: Lectures at Sietch Tabr

    Leto lay at the crest of a dune, peering across open sand at a sinuous rock outcropping. The rock lay like an immense worm atop the sand, flat and threatening in the morning sunlight. Nothing stirred there. No bird circled overhead; no animal scampered among the rocks. He would see the slots of a windtrap almost at the center of the "worm's" back. There'd be water here. The rock-worm held the familiar appearance of a sietch shelter, except for the absence of living things. He lay quietly, blending with sand, watching.
    One of Gurney Halleck's tunes kept flowing through his mind, monotonously persistent:

Beneath the hill where the fox runs lightly, 
A dappled sun shines brightly 
Where my one love's still.
Beneath the hill in the fennel brake 
I spy my love who cannot wake. 
He hides in a grave 
Beneath the hill.

    Where was the entrance to that place? Leto wondered.
    He felt the certainty that this must be Jacurutu/Fondak, but there was something wrong here beyond the lack of animal movement. Something flickered at the edges of conscious perception, warning him.
    What hid beneath the hill?
    Lack of animals was bothersome. It aroused his Fremen sense of caution: The absence says more than the presence when it comes to desert survival. But there was a windtrap. There would be water and humans to use it. This was the tabu place which hid behind Fondak's name, its other identity lost even to the memories of most Fremen. And no birds or animals could be seen there. 
    No humans -- yet here the Golden Path began.
    His father had once said: "There's unknown all around at every moment. That's where you seek knowledge." 
    Leto glanced out to his right along the dune crests. There'd been a mother storm recently. Lake Azrak, the gypsum plain, had been exposed from beneath its sandy cover. Fremen superstition said that whoever saw the Biyan, the White Lands, was granted a two-edged wish, a wish which might destroy you. Leto saw only a gypsum plain which told him that open water had existed once here on Arrakis.
    As it would exist once more.
    He peered upward, swinging his gaze all around in the search for movement. The sky was porous after the storm. Light passing through it generated a sensation of milky presence, of a silver sun lost somewhere above the dust veil which persisted in the high altitudes.
    Once more Leto brought his attention back to the sinuous rock. He slipped the binoculars from his Fremkit, focused their motile lenses and peered at the naked greyness, this out-cropping where once the men of Jacurutu had lived. Amplification revealed a thorn bush, the one called Queen of Night. The bush nestled in shadows at a cleft which might be an entrance into the old sietch. He scanned the length of the outcropping. The silver sun turned reds into grey, casting a diffuse flatness over the long expanse of rock.
    He rolled over, turning his back on Jacurutu, scanned the circle of his surroundings through the binoculars. Nothing in that wilderness preserved the marks of human passage. The wind already had obliterated his tracks, leaving only a vague roundness where he had dropped from his worm in the night.
    Again he looked at Jacurutu. Except for the windtrap, there was no sign that men had ever passed this way. And without that sinuous length of rock, there was nothing here to subtract from the bleached sand, a wilderness from horizon to horizon.
    Leto felt suddenly that he was in this place because he had refused to be confined in the system which his ancestors bequeathed him. He thought of how people looked at him, that universal mistake in every glance except Ghanima's.
    Except for that ragged mob of other memories, this child was never a child.
    I must accept responsibility for the decision we made, he thought.
    Once more he scanned the length of rock. By all the descriptions this had to be Fondak, and no other place could be Jacurutu. He felt a strange resonant relationship with the tabu of this place. In the Bene Gesserit Way, he opened his mind to Jacurutu, seeking to know nothing about it. Knowing was a barrier which prevented learning. For a few moments he allowed himself merely to resonate, making no demands, asking no questions.
    The problem lay within the lack of animal life, but it was a particular thing which alerted him. He perceived it then: there were no scavenger birds -- no eagles, no vultures, no hawks. Even when other life hid, these remained. Every watering place in this desert held its chain of life. At the end of the chain were the omnipresent scavengers. Nothing had come to investigate his presence. How well he knew the "watchdogs of the sietch," that line of crouched birds on the cliff's edge at Tabr, primitive undertakers waiting for flesh. As the Fremen said: "Our competitors." But they said it with no sense of jealousy because questing birds often told when strangers approached.
    What if this Fondak has been abandoned even by the smugglers?
    Leto paused to drink from one of his catchtubes. 
    What if there's truly no water here?
    He reviewed his position. He'd run two worms into the sand getting here, riding them with his flail through the night, leaving them half-dead. This was the Inner Desert where the smugglers' haven was to be found. If life existed here, if it could exist, it would have to be in the presence of water.
    What if there's no water? What if this isn't Fondak/Jacurutu?
    Once more he aimed his binoculars at the windtrap. Its outer edges were sand-etched, in need of maintenance, but enough of it remained. There should be water. 
    But what if there isn't?
    An abandoned sietch might lose its water to the air, to any number of catastrophes. Why were there no scavenger birds? Killed for their water? By whom? How could all of them be eliminated? Poison?
    Poisoned water.
    The legend of Jacurutu contained no story of the cistern poisoned, but it might have been. If the original flocks were slain, would they not have been renewed by this time? The Iduali were wiped out generations ago and the stories never mentioned poison. Again he examined the rock with his binoculars. How could an entire sietch have been wiped out? Certainly some must have escaped. All of the inhabitants of a sietch were seldom at home. Parties roamed the desert, trekked to the towns.
    With a sigh of resignation Leto put away his binoculars. He slipped down the hidden face of the dune, took extra care to dig in his stilltent and conceal all sign of his intrusion as he prepared to spend the hot hours. The sluggish currents of fatigue stole along his limbs as he sealed himself in the darkness. Within the tent's sweaty, confines he spent much of the day drowsing, imagining mistakes he could have made. His dreams were defensive, but there could be no self-defense in this trial he and Ghanima had chosen. Failure would scald their souls. He ate spice-biscuits and slept, awakened to eat once more, to drink and return to sleep. It had been a long journey to this place, a severe test for the muscles of a child.
    Toward evening he awoke refreshed, listened for signs of life. He crept out of his sandy shroud. There was dust high up in the sky blowing one way, but he could feel sand stinging his cheek from another direction -- sure sign there would be a weather change. He sensed a storm coming.
    Cautiously he crept to the crest of his dune, peered once more at those enigmatic rocks. The intervening air was yellow. The signs spoke of a Coriolis storm approaching, the wind that carried death in its belly. There'd be a great winding sheet of wind-driven sand that might stretch across four degrees of latitude. The desolate emptiness of the gypsum pan was a yellow surface now, reflecting the dust clouds. The false peace of evening enfolded him. Then the day collapsed and it was night, the quick night of the Inner Desert. The rocks were transformed into angular peaks frosted by the light of First Moon. He felt sandthorns stinging his skin. A peal of dry thunder sounded like an echo from distant drums and, in the space between moonlight and darkness he saw sudden movement: bats. He could hear the stirring of their wings, their tiny squeaks. 
    Bats.
    By design or accident, this place conveyed a sense of abandoned desolation. It was where the half-legendary smuggler stronghold should be: Fondak. But what if it were not Fondak? What if the tabu still ruled and this were only the shell of ghostly Jacurutu?
    Leto crouched in the lee of his dune and waited for the night to settle into its own rhythms. Patience and caution -- caution and patience. For a time he amused himself by reviewing Chaucer's route from London to Canterbury, listing the places from Southwark: two miles to the watering-place of St. Thomas, five miles to Deptford, six miles to Greenwich, thirty miles to Rochester, forty miles to Sittingboume, fifty-five miles to Boughton under Blean, fifty-eight miles to Harbledown, and sixty miles to Canterbury. It gave him a sense of timeless buoyancy to know that few in his universe would recall Chaucer or know any London except the village on Gansireed. St. Thomas was preserved in the Orange Catholic Bible and the Azhar Book, but Canterbury was gone from the memories of men, as was the planet which had known it. There lay the burden of his memories, of all those lives which threatened to engulf him. He had made that trip to Canterbury once. 
    His present trip was longer, though, and more dangerous.
    Presently he crept over the dune's crest and made his way toward the moonlit rocks. He blended with shadows, slid across the crests, made no sounds that might signal his presence.
    The dust had gone as it often did just before a storm, and the night was brilliant. The day had revealed no movement, but he heard small creatures hustling in the darkness as he neared the rocks.
    In a valley between two dunes he came upon a family of jerboa which scampered away at his approach. He eased over the next crest, his emotions beset by salty anxieties. That cleft he had seen -- did it lead up to an entrance? And there were other concerns: the old-time sietch had always been guarded by traps -- poisoned barbs in pits, poisoned spines on plants. He felt himself caught up in the Fremen agrapha: The ear-minded night. And he listened for the slightest sound.
    The grey rocks lowered above him now, made giant by his nearness. As he listened, he heard birds invisible in that cliff, the soft calling of winged prey. They were the sounds of daybirds, but abroad by night. What had turned their world around? Human predation?
    Abruptly Leto froze against the sand. There was fire on the cliff, a ballet of glittering and mysterious gems against the night's black gauze, the sort of signal a sietch might send to wanderers across the bled. Who were these occupants of this place? He crept forward into the deepest shadows at the cliff's base, felt along the rock with a hand, sliding his body behind the hand as he sought the fissure he'd seen by daylight. He located it on his eighth step, slipped the sandsnorkel from his kit and probed the darkness. As he moved, something tight and binding dropped over his shoulders and arms, immobilizing him. 
    Trapvine!
    He resisted the urge to struggle; that only made the vine pull tighter. He dropped the snorkel, flexed the fingers of his right hand, trying for the knife at his waist. He felt like a bare innocent for not throwing something into that fissure from a distance, testing the darkness for its dangers. His mind had been too occupied by the fire on the cliff.
    Each movement tightened the trapvine, but his fingers at last touched the knife hilt. Stealthily, he closed his hand around the hilt, began to slip it free.
    Flaring light enveloped him, arresting all movement.
    "Ahhh, a fine catch in our net." It was a heavy masculine voice from behind Leto, something vaguely familiar in the tone. Leto tried to turn his head, aware of the vine's dangerous propensity to crush a body which moved too freely.
    A hand took his knife, before he could see his captor. The hand moved expertly over his body, extracting the small devices he and Ghanima carried as a matter of survival. Nothing escaped the searcher, not even the shigawire garrote concealed in his hair. 
    Leto still had not seen the man.
    Fingers did something with the trapvine and he found he could breathe easier, but the man said: "Do not struggle, Leto Atreides. I have your water in my cup."
    By supreme effort Leto remained calm, said: "You know my name?"
    "Of course! When one baits a trap, it's for a purpose. One aims for a specific quarry, not so?"
    Leto remained silent, but his thoughts whirled.
    "You feel betrayed!" the heavy voice said. Hands turned him around, gently but with an obvious show of strength. An adult male was telling the child what the odds were.
    Leto stared up into the glare from twin floater flares, saw the black outline of a stillsuit-masked face, the hood. As his eyes adjusted he made out a dark strip of skin, the utterly shadowed eyes of melange addiction.
    "You wonder why we went to all this trouble," the man said. His voice issued from the shielded lower part of his face with a curious muffled quality, as though he tried to conceal an accent.
    "I long ago ceased to wonder at the numbers of people who want the Atreides twins dead," Leto said. "Their reasons are obvious."
    As he spoke, Leto's mind flung itself against the unknown as against a cage, questing wildly for answers. A baited trap? But who had known except Ghanima? Impossible! Ghanima wouldn't betray her own brother. Then did someone know him well enough to predict his actions? Who? His grandmother? How could she?
    "You could not be permitted to go on as you were," the man said. "Very bad. Before ascending the throne, you need to be educated." The whiteless eyes stared down at him. "You wonder how one could presume to educate such a person as yourself? You, with the knowledge of a multitude held there in your memories? That's just it, you see! You think yourself educated, but all you are is a repository of dead lives. You don't yet have a life of your own. You're just a walking surfeit of others, all with one goal -- to seek death. Not good in a ruler, being a death seeker. You'd strew your surroundings with corpses. Your father, for example, never understood the --" 
    "You dare speak of him that way?"
    "Many's the time I've dared it. He was only Paul Atreides, after all. Well, boy, welcome to your school."
    The man brought a hand from beneath his robe, touched Leto's cheek. Leto felt the jolt of a slapshot and found himself winding downward into a darkness where a green flag waved. It was the green banner of the Atreides with its day and night symbols, its Dune staff which concealed a water tube. He heard the water gurgling as unconsciousness enfolded him. Or was it someone chuckling?

= = = = = =

We can still remember the golden days before Heisenberg, who showed humans the walls enclosing our predestined arguments. The lives within me find this amusing. Knowledge, you see, has no uses without purpose, but purpose is what builds enclosing walls.
-Leto Atreides II, His Voice

    Alia found herself speaking harshly to the guards she confronted in the Temple foyer. There were nine of them in the dusty green uniforms of the suburban patrol, and they were still panting and sweating with their exertions. The light of late afternoon came in the door behind them. The area had been cleared of pilgrims. 
    "So my orders mean nothing to you?" she demanded.
    And she wondered at her own anger, not trying to contain it but letting it run. Her body trembled with unleashed tensions. Idaho gone . . . the Lady Jessica . . . no reports . . . only rumors that they were on Salusa. Why hadn't Idaho sent a message? What had he done? Had he learned finally about Javid?
    Alia wore the yellow of Arrakeen mourning, the color of the burning sun from Fremen history. In a few minutes she would be leading the second and final funeral procession to Old Gap, there to complete the stone marker for her lost nephew. The work would be completed in the night, fitting homage to one who'd been destined to lead Fremen.
    The priestly guards appeared defiant in the face of her anger, not shamed at all. They stood in front of her, outlined by the waning light. The odor of their perspiration was easily detected through the light and inefficient stillsuits of city dwellers. Their leader, a tall blond Kaza with the bourka symbols of the Cadelam family, flung his stillsuit mask aside to speak more clearly. His voice was full of the prideful intonations to be expected from a scion of the family which once had ruled at Sietch Abbir. 
    "Certainly we tried to capture him!"
    The man was obviously outraged at her attack. "He speaks blasphemy! We know your orders, but we heard him with our own ears!"
    "And you failed to catch him," Alia said, her voice low and accusing.
    One of the other guards, a short young woman, tried to defend them. "The crowds were thick there! I swear people interfered with us!"
    "We'll keep after him," the Cadelam said. "We'll not always fail." 
    Alia scowled. "Why won't you understand and obey me?" 
    "My Lady, we --"
    "What will you do, scion of the Cade Lamb, if you capture him and find him to be, in truth, my brother?"
    He obviously did not hear her special emphasis on his name, although he could not be a priestly guard without some education and the wit to go with it. Did he want to sacrifice himself?
    The guardsman swallowed, then: "We must kill him ourselves, for he breeds disorder."
    The others stood aghast at this, but still defiant. They knew what they had heard.
    "He calls upon the tribes to band against you," the Cadelam said.
    Alia knew how to handle him now. She spoke in a quiet, matter-of-fact tone: "I see. Then if you must sacrifice yourself this way, taking him openly for all to see who you are and what you do, then I guess you must."
    "Sacrifice my . . ." He broke off, glanced at his companions. As Kaza of this group, their appointed leader, he had the right to speak for them, but he showed signs that he wished he'd remained silent. The other guards stirred uncomfortably. In the heat of the chase they'd defied Alia. One could only reflect now upon such defiance of the "Womb of Heaven." With obvious discomfort the guards opened a small space between themselves and their Kaza.
    "For the good of the Church, our official reaction would have to be severe," Alia said. "You understand that, don't you?" 
    "But he --"
    "I've heard him myself," she said. "But this is a special case."
    "He cannot be Muad'Dib, My Lady!"
    How little you know! she thought. She said: "We cannot risk taking him in the open, harming him where others could see it. If another opportunity presents itself, of course." 
    "He's always surrounded by crowds these days!" 
    "Then I fear you must be patient. Of course, if you insist on defying me . . ." She left the consequences hanging in the air, unspoken, but well understood. The Cadelam was ambitious, a shining career before him.
    "We didn't mean defiance, My Lady." The man had himself under control now. "We acted hastily; I can see that. Forgive us, but he --"
    "Nothing has happened; nothing to forgive," she said, using the common Fremen formula. It was one of the many ways a tribe kept peace in its ranks, and this Cadelam was still Old Fremen enough to remember that. His family carried a long tradition of leadership. Guilt was the Naib's whip, to be used sparingly. Fremen served best when free of guilt or resentment.
    He showed his realization of her judgment by bowing his head, saying: "For the good of the tribe; I understand." 
    "Go refresh yourselves," she said. "The procession begins in a few minutes."
    "Yes, My Lady." They bustled away, every movement revealing their relief at this escape.
    Within Alia's head a bass rumbled: "Ahhhhh, you handled that most adroitly. One or two of them still believe you desire The Preacher dead. They'll find a way."
    "Shut up!" she hissed. "Shut up! I should never have listened to you! Look what you've done . . ." 
    "Set you on the road to immortality," the bass voice said.
    She felt it echoing in her skull like a distant ache, thought: Where can I hide? There's no place to go!
    "Ghanima's knife is sharp," the Baron said. "Remember that."
    Alia blinked. Yes, that was something to remember. Ghanima's knife was sharp. That knife might yet cut them out of their present predicament. 

= = = = = =

If you believe certain words, you believe their hidden arguments. When you believe something is right or wrong, true or false, you believe the assumptions in the words which express the arguments. Such assumptions are often full of holes, but remain most precious to the convinced.
-The Open-Ended Proof from, The Panoplia Prophetica

    Leto's mind floated in a stew of fierce odors. He recognized the heavy cinnamon of melange, the confined sweat of working bodies, the acridity of an uncapped deathstill, dust of many sorts with flint dominant. The odors formed a trail through dreamsand, created shapes of fog in a dead land. He knew these odors should tell him something, but part of him could not yet listen.
    Thoughts like wraiths floated through his mind: In this time I have no finished features; I am all of my ancestors. The sun setting into the sand is the sun setting into my soul. Once this multitude within me was great, but that's ended. I'm Fremen and I'll have a Fremen ending. The Golden Path is ended before it began. It's nothing but a windblown trail. We Fremen knew all the tricks to conceal ourselves: we left no feces, no water, no tracks . . . Now, look at my trail vanish.
    A masculine voice spoke close to his ear: "I could kill you, Atreides. I could kill you, Atreides." It was repeated over and over until it lost meaning, became a wordless thing carried within Leto's dreaming, a litany of sorts: "I could kill you, Atreides." 
    Leto cleared his throat and felt the reality of this simple act shake his senses. His dry throat managed: "Who . . ." 
    The voice beside him said: "I'm an educated Fremen and I've killed my man. You took away our gods, Atreides. What do we care about your stinking Muad'Dib? Your god's dead!" 
    Was that a real Ouraba voice or another part of his dream? Leto opened his eyes, found himself unfettered on a hard couch. He looked upward at rock, dim glowglobes, an unmasked face staring down at him so close he could smell the breath with its familiar odors of a sietch diet. The face was Fremen; no mistaking the dark skin, those sharp features and water-wasted flesh. This was no fat city dweller. Here was a desert Fremen.
    "I am Namri, father of Javid," the Fremen said. "Do you know me now, Atreides?" 
    "I know Javid," Leto husked.
    "Yes, your family knows my son well. I am proud of him. You Atreides may know him even better soon." 
    "What . . ."
    "I am one of your schoolmasters, Atreides. I have only one function: I am the one who could kill you. I'd do it gladly. In this school, to graduate is to live; to fail is to be given into my hands."
    Leto heard implacable sincerity in that voice. It chilled him. This was a human gom jabbar, a high-handed enemy to test his right of entrance into the human concourse. Leto sensed his grandmother's hand in this and, behind her, the faceless masses of the Bene Gesserit. He writhed at this thought.
    "Your education begins with me," Namri said. "That is just. It is fitting. Because it could end with me. Listen to me carefully now. My every word carries your life in it. Everything about me holds your death within it."
    Leto shot his glance around the room: rock walls, barren -- only this couch, the dim glowglobes, and a dark passage behind Namri.
    "You will not get past me," Namri said. And Leto believed him.
    "Why're you doing this?" Leto asked.
    "That's already been explained. Think what plans are in your head! You are here and you cannot put a future into your present condition. The two don't go together: now and future. But if you really know your past, if you look backward and see where you've been, perhaps there'll be reason once more. If not, there will be your death."
    Leto noted that Namri's tone was not unkind, but it was firm and no denying the death in it.
    Namri rocked back on his heels, stared at the rock ceiling. "In olden times Fremen faced east at dawn. Eos, you know? That's dawn in one of the old tongues." 
    Bitter pride in his voice, Leto said: "I speak that tongue." 
    "You have not listened to me, then," Namri said, and there was a knife edge in his voice. "Night was the time of chaos. Day was the time of order. That's how it was in the time of that tongue you say you speak: darkness-disorder, light-order. We Fremen changed that. Eos was the light we distrusted. We preferred the light of a moon, or the stars. Light was too much order and that can be fatal. You see what you Eos-Atreides have done? Man is a creature of only that light which protects him. The sun was our enemy on Dune." Namri brought his gaze down to Leto's level. "What light do you prefer, Atreides?"
    By Namri's poised attitude, Leto sensed that this question carried deep weight. Would the man kill him if he failed to answer correctly? He might. Leto saw Namri's hand resting quietly next to the polished hilt of a crysknife. A ring in the form of a magic tortoise glittered on the Fremen's knife hand.
    Leto eased himself up onto his elbows, sent his mind questing into Fremen beliefs. They trusted the Law and loved to hear its lessons expounded in analogy, these old Fremen. The light of the moon?
    "I prefer . . . the light of Lisanu L'haqq," Leto said, watching Namri for subtle revelations. The man seemed disappointed, but his hand moved away from his knife. "It is the light of truth, the light of the perfect man in which the influence of al-Mutakallim can clearly be seen," Leto continued. "What other light would a human prefer?"
    "You speak as one who recites, not one who believes," Namri said.
    And Leto thought: I did recite. But he began to sense the drift of Namri's thoughts, how his words were filtered through early training in the ancient riddle game. Thousands of these riddles went into Fremen training, and Leto had but to bend his attention upon this custom to find examples flooding his mind. "Challenge: Silence? Answer: The friend of the hunted. "
    Namri nodded to himself as though he shared this thought, said: "There is a cave which is the cave of life for Fremen. It is an actual cave which the desert has hidden. Shai-Hulud, the great-grandfather of all Fremen, sealed up that cave. My Uncle Ziamad told me about it and he never lied to me. There is such a cave." 
    Leto heard the challenging silence when Namri finished speaking. Cave of life? "My Uncle Stilgar also told me of that cave," Leto said. "It was sealed to keep cowards from hiding there." 
    The reflection of a glowglobe glittered in Namri's shadowed eyes. He asked: "Would you Atreides open that cave? You seek to control life through a ministry: your Central Ministry for Information, Auqaf and Hajj. The Maulana in charge is called Kausar. He has come a long way from his family's beginnings at the salt mines of Niazi. Tell me, Atreides, what is wrong with your ministry?"
    Leto sat up, aware now that he was fully into the riddle game with Namri and that the forfeit was death. The man gave every indication that he'd use that crysknife at the first wrong answer.
    Namri, recognizing this awareness in Leto, said: "Believe me, Atreides. I am the clod-crusher. I am the Iron Hammer." 
    Now Leto understood. Namri saw himself as Mirzabah, the Iron Hammer with which the dead are beaten who cannot reply satisfactorily to the questions they must answer before entry into paradise.
    What was wrong with the central ministry which Alia and her priests had created?
    Leto thought of why he'd come into the desert, and a small hope returned to him that the Golden Path might yet appear in his universe. What this Namri implied by his question was no more than the motive which had driven Muad'Dib's own son into the desert. 
    "God's it is to show the way," Leto said.
    Namri's chin jerked down and he stared sharply at Leto. "Can it be true that you believe this?" he demanded. 
    "It's why I am here," Leto said. 
    "To find the way?"
    "To find it for myself." Leto put his feet over the edge of the cot. The rock floor was uncarpeted, cold. "The Priests created their ministry to hide the way."
    "You speak like a true rebel," Namri said, and he rubbed the tortoise ring on his finger. "We shall see. Listen carefully once more. You know the high Shield Wall at Jalalud-Din? That Wall bears my family's marks carved there in the first days. Javid, my son, has seen those marks. Abedi Jalal, my nephew, has seen them. Mujahid Shafqat of the Other Ones, he too has seen our marks. In the season of the storms near Sukkar, I came down with my friend Yakup Abad near that place. The winds were blistering hot like the whirlwinds from which we learned our dances. We did not take time to see the marks because a storm blocked the way. But when the storm passed we saw the vision of Thatta upon the blown sand. The face of Shakir Ali was there for a moment, looking down upon his city of tombs. The vision was gone in the instant, but we all saw it. Tell me, Atreides, where can I find that city of tombs?" 
    The whirlwinds from which we learned our dances, Leto thought. The vision of Thatta and Shakir Ali. These were the words of a Zensunni Wanderer, those who considered themselves to be the only true men of the desert.
    And Fremen were forbidden to have tombs.
    "The city of tombs is at the end of the path which all men follow," Leto said. And he dredged up the Zensunni beatifies. "It is in a garden one thousand paces square. There is a fine entry corridor two hundred and thirty-three paces long and one hundred paces wide all paved with marble from ancient Jaipur. Therein dwells ar-Razzaq, he who provides food for all who ask. And on the Day of Reckoning, all who stand up and seek the city of tombs shall not find it. For it is written: That which you know in one world, you shall not find in another."
    "Again you recite without belief," Namri sneered. "But I'll accept it for now because I think you know why you're here." A cold smile touched his lips. "I give you a provisional future, Atreides."
    Leto studied the man warily. Was this another question in disguise?
    "Good!" Namri said. "Your awareness has been prepared. I've sunk home the barbs. One more thing, then. Have you heard that they use imitation stillsuits in the cities of far Kadrish?"
    As Namri waited, Leto quested in his mind for a hidden meaning. Imitation stillsuits? They were worn on many planets. He said: "The foppish habits of Kadrish are an old story often repeated. The wise animal blends into its surroundings."
    Namri nodded slowly. Then: "The one who trapped you and brought you here will see you presently. Do not try to leave this place. It would be your death." Arising as he spoke, Namri went out into the dark passage.
    For a long time after he had gone, Leto stared into the passage. He could hear sounds out there, the quiet voices of men on guard duty. Namri's story of the mirage-vision stayed with Leto. It brought up the long desert crossing to this place. It no longer mattered whether this were Jacurutu/Fondak. Namri was not a smuggler. He was something much more potent. And the game Namri played smelled of the Lady Jessica; it stank of the Bene Gesserit. Leto sensed an enclosing peril in this realization. But that dark passage where Namri had gone was the only exit from this room. And outside lay a strange sietch -- beyond that, the desert. The harsh severity of that desert, its ordered chaos with mirages and endless dunes, came over Leto as part of the trap in which he was caught. He could recross that sand, but where would flight take him? The thought was like stagnant water. It would not quench his thirst.

= = = = = =

Because of the one-pointed Time awareness in which the conventional mind remains immersed, humans tend to think of everything in a sequential, word-oriented framework. This mental trap produces very short-term concepts of effectiveness and consequences, a condition of constant, unplanned response to crises.
-Liet-Kynes, The Arrakis Workbook

    Words and movements simultaneous, Jessica reminded herself and she bent her thoughts to those necessary mental preparations for the coming encounter.
    The hour was shortly after breakfast, the golden sun of Salusa Secundus just beginning to touch the far wall of the enclosed garden which she could see from her window. She had dressed herself carefully: the black hooded cloak of a Reverend Mother, but it carried the Atreides crest in gold worked into an embroidered ring around the hem and again at the cuff of each sleeve. Jessica arranged the drape of her garment carefully as she turned her back on the window, holding her left arm across her waist to present the Hawk motif of the crest.
    Farad'n noted the Atreides symbols, commenting on them as he entered, but he betrayed no anger or surprise. She detected subtle humor in his voice and wondered at it. She saw that he had clad himself in the grey leotard which she had suggested. He sat on the low green divan to which she directed him, relaxing with his right arm along the back.
    Why do I trust her? he wondered. This is a Bene Gesserit witch!
    Jessica, reading the thought in the contrast between his relaxed body and the expression on his face, smiled and said: "You trust me because you know our bargain is a good one, and you want what I can teach you."
    She saw the pinch of a scowl touch his brow, waved her left hand to calm him. "No, I don't read minds. I read the face, the body, the mannerisms, tone of voice, set of arms. Anyone can do this once they learn the Bene Gesserit Way."
    "And you will teach me?"
    "I'm sure you've studied the reports about us," she said. "Is there anywhere a report that we fail to deliver on a direct promise?" 
    "No reports, but . . ."
    "We survive in part by the complete confidence which people can have in our truthfulness. That has not changed." 
    "I find this reasonable," he said. "I'm anxious to begin." 
    "I'm surprised you've never asked the Bene Gesserit for a teacher," she said. "They would've leaped at the opportunity to put you in their debt."
    "My mother would never listen to me when I urged her to do this," he said. "But now . . ." He shrugged, an eloquent comment on Wensicia's banishment. "Shall we start?"
    "It would've been better to begin this when you were much younger," Jessica said. "It'll be harder for you now, and it'll take much longer. You'll have to begin by learning patience, extreme patience. I pray you'll not find it too high a price." 
    "Not for the reward you offer."
    She heard the sincerity, the pressure of expectations, and the touch of awe in his voice. These formed a place to begin. She said: "The art of patience, then -- starting with some elementary prana-bindu exercises for the legs and arms, for your breathing. We'll leave the hands and fingers for later. Are you ready?" 
    She seated herself on a stool facing him.
    Farad'n nodded, holding an expectant expression on his face to conceal the sudden onset of fear. Tyekanik had warned him that there must be a trick in the Lady Jessica's offer, something brewed by the Sisterhood. "You cannot believe that she has abandoned them again or that they have abandoned her." Farad'n had stopped the argument with an angry outburst for which he'd been immediately sorry. His emotional reaction had made him agree more quickly with Tyekanik's precautions. Farad'n glanced at the corners of the room, the subtle gleam of jems in the coving. All that glittered was not jems: everything in this room would be recorded and good minds would review every nuance, every word, every movement.
    Jessica smiled, noting the direction of his gaze, but not revealing that she knew where his attention had wandered. She said: "To learn patience in the Bene Gesserit Way, you must begin by recognizing the essential, raw instability of our universe. We call nature -- meaning this totality in all of its manifestations -- the Ultimate Non-Absolute. To free your vision and permit you to recognize this conditional nature's changing ways, you will hold your two hands at arm's length in front of you. Stare at your extended hands, first the palms and then the backs. Examine the fingers, front and back. Do it."
    Farad'n complied, but he felt foolish. These were his own hands. He knew them.
    "Imagine your hands aging," Jessica said. "They must grow very old in your eyes. Very, very old. Notice how dry the skin . . ." 
    "My hands don't change," he said. He already could feel the muscles of his upper arms trembling.
    "Continue to stare at your hands. Make them old, as old as you can imagine. It may take time. But when you see them age, reverse the process. Make your hands young again -- as young as you can make them. Strive to take them from infancy to great age at will, back and forth, back and forth." 
    "They don't change!" he protested. His shoulders ached.
    "If you demand it of your senses, your hands will change," she said. "Concentrate upon visualizing the flow of time which you desire: infancy to age, age to infancy. It may take you hours, days, months. But it can be achieved. Reversing that change-flow will teach you to see every system as something spinning in relative stability . . . only relative."
    "I thought I was learning patience." She heard anger in his voice, an edge of frustration.
    "And relative stability," she said. "This is the perspective which you create with your own belief, and beliefs can be manipulated by imagination. You've learned only a limited way of looking at the universe. Now you must make the universe your own creation. This will permit you to harness any relative stability to your own uses, to whatever uses you are capable of imagining." 
    "How long did you say it takes?" 
    "Patience," she reminded him.
    A spontaneous grin touched his lips. His eyes wavered toward her.
    "Look at your hands!" she snapped.
    The grin vanished. His gaze jerked back to a fixated concentration upon his extended hands.
    "What do I do when my arms get tired?" he asked.
    "Stop talking and concentrate," she said. "If you become too tired, stop. Return to it after a few minutes of relaxation and exercise. You must persist in this until you succeed. At your present stage, this is more important than you could possibly realize. Learn this lesson or the others will not come."
    Farad'n inhaled a deep breath, chewed his lips, stared at his hands. He turned them slowly: front, back, front, back . . . His shoulders trembled with fatigue. Front, back . . . Nothing changed.
    Jessica arose, crossed to the only door.
    He spoke without removing his attention from his hands. "Where are you going?"
    "You'll work better on this if you're alone. I'll return in about an hour. Patience." 
    "I know!"
    She studied him a moment. How intent he looked. He reminded her with a heart-tugging abruptness of her own lost son. She permitted herself a sigh, said: "When I return I'll give you the exercise lessons to relieve your muscles. Give it time. You'll be astonished at what you can make your body and your senses do." 
    She let herself out.
    The omnipresent guards took up station three paces behind her as she strode down the hall. Their awe and fear were obvious. They were Sardaukar, thrice-warned of her prowess, raised on the stories of their defeat by the Fremen of Arrakis. This witch was a Fremen Reverend Mother, a Bene Gesserit and an Atreides.
    Jessica, glancing back, saw their stern faces as a milepost in her design. She turned away as she came to the stairs, went down them and through a short passage into the garden below her windows.
    Now if only Duncan and Gurney can do their parts, she thought as she felt the gravel of a pathway beneath her feet, saw the golden light filtered by greenery.

= = = = = =

You will learn the integrated communication methods as you complete the next step in your mentat education. This is a gestalten function which will overlay data paths in your awareness, resolving complexities and masses of input from the mentat index-catalogue techniques which you already have mastered. Your initial problem will be the breaking tensions arising from the divergent assembly of minutiae/data on specialized subjects. Be warned. Without mentat overlay integration, you can be immersed in the Babel Problem, which is the label we give to the omnipresent dangers of achieving wrong combinations from accurate information.
-The Mentat Handbook

    The sound of fabrics rubbing together sent sparks of awareness through Leto. He was surprised that he had turned his sensitivity to the point where he automatically identified the fabrics from their sound: the combination came from a Fremen robe rubbing against the coarse hangings of a door curtain. He turned toward the sound. It came from the passage where Namri had gone minutes before. As Leto turned, he saw his captor enter. It was the same man who had taken him prisoner: the same dark strip of skin above the stillsuit mask, the identical searing eyes. The man lifted a hand to his mask, slipped the catchtube from his nostrils, lowered the mask and, in the same motion, flipped his hood back. Even before he focused on the scar of the inkvine whip along the man's jaw, Leto recognized him. The recognition was a totality in his awareness with the search for confirming details coming afterward. No mistake about it, this rolling lump of humanity, this warrior-troubadour, was Gurney Halleck!
    Leto clenched his hands into fists, overcome momentarily by the shock of recognition. No Atreides retainer had ever been more loyal. None better at shield fighting. He'd been Paul's trusted confidant and teacher.
    He was the Lady Jessica's servant.
    These recognitions and more surged through Leto's mind. Gurney was his captor. Gurney and Namri were in this conspiracy together. And Jessica's hand was in it with them.
    "I understand you've met our Namri," Halleck said. "Pray believe him, young sir. He has one function and one function only. He's the one capable of killing you should the need arise." 
    Leto responded automatically with his father's tones: "So you've joined my enemies, Gurney! I never thought the --" 
    "Try none of your devil tricks on me, lad," Halleck said. "I'm proof against them all. I follow your grandmother's orders. Your education has been planned to the last detail. It was she who approved my selection of Namri. What comes next, painful as it may seem, is at her command." 
    "And what does she command?"
    Halleck lifted a hand from the folds of his robe, exposed a Fremen injector, primitive but efficient. Its transparent tube was charged with blue fluid.
    Leto squirmed backward on the cot, was stopped by the rock wall. As he moved, Namri entered, stood beside Halleck with hand on crysknife. Together they blocked the only exit.
    "I see you've recognized the spice essence," Halleck said. "You're to take the worm trip, lad. You must go through it. Otherwise, what your father dared and you dare not would hang over you for the rest of your days."
    Leto shook his head wordlessly. This was the thing he and Ghanima knew could overwhelm them. Gurney was an ignorant fool! How could Jessica . . . Leto felt the father-presence in his memories. It surged into his mind, trying to strip away his defenses. Leto wanted to shriek outrage, could not move his lips. But this was the wordless thing which his pre-born awareness most feared. This was prescient trance, the reading of immutable future with all of its fixity and its terrors. Surely Jessica could not have ordered such an ordeal for her own grandson. But her presence loomed in his mind, filling him with acceptance arguments. Even the litany of fear was pressed upon him with a repetitive droning: "I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past . . ."
    With an oath already ancient when Chaldea was young, Leto tried to move, tried to leap at the two men standing over him, but his muscles refused to obey. As though he already existed in the trance, Leto saw Halleck's hand move, the injector approach. The light of a glowglobe sparkled within the blue fluid. The injector touched Leto's left arm. Pain lanced through him, shot upward to the muscles of his head.
    Abruptly Leto saw a young woman sitting outside a crude hut in dawnlight. She sat right there in front of him roasting coffee beans to a rose brown, adding cardamom and melange. The voice of a rebeck echoed from somewhere behind him. The music echoed and echoed until it entered his head, still echoing. It suffused his body and he felt himself to be large, very large, not a child at all. And his skin was not his own. He knew that sensation! His skin was not his own. Warmth spread through his body. As abruptly as his first vision, he found himself standing in darkness. It was night. Stars like a rain of embers fell in gusts from a brilliant cosmos.
    Part of him knew there was no escaping, but still he tried to fight it until the father-presence intruded. "I will protect you in the trance. The others within will not take you."
    Wind tumbled Leto, rolled him, hissing, pouring dust and sand over him, cutting his arms, his face, abrading his clothes, whipping the loose-torn ends of now useless fabric. But he felt no pain and he saw the cuts heal as rapidly as they appeared. Still he rolled with the wind. And his skin was not his own. 
    It will happen! he thought.
    But the thought was distant and came as though it were not his own, not really his own; no more than his skin.
    The vision absorbed him. It evolved into a stereologic memory which separated past and present, future and present, future and past. Each separation mingled into a trinocular focus which he sensed as the multidimensional relief map of his own future existence.
    He thought: Time is a measure of space, just as a range finder is a measure of space, but measuring locks us into the place we measure.
    He sensed the trance deepening. It came as an amplification of internal consciousness which his self-identity soaked up and through which he felt himself changing. It was living Time and he could not arrest an instant of it. Memory fragments, future and past, deluged him. But they existed as montage-in-motion. Their relationships underwent a constant dance. His memory was a lens, an illuminating searchlight which picked out fragments, isolating them, but forever failing to stop the ceaseless motion and modification which surged into his view.
    That which he and Ghanima had planned came through the searchlight, dominating everything, but now it terrified him. Vision reality ached in him. The uncritical inevitability made his ego cringe.
    And his skin was not his own! Past and present tumbled through him, surging across the barriers of his terror. He could not separate them. One moment he felt himself setting forth on the Butlerian Jihad, eager to destroy any machine which simulated human awareness. That had to be the past -- over and done with. Yet his senses hurtled through the experience, absorbing the most minute details. He heard a minister-companion speaking from a pulpit: "We must negate the machines-that-think. Humans must set their own guidelines. This is not something machines can do. Reasoning depends upon programming, not on hardware, and we are the ultimate program!"
    He heard the voice clearly, knew his surroundings -- a vast wooden hall with dark windows. Light came from sputtering flames. And his minister-companion said: "Our Jihad is a 'dump program.' We dump the things which destroy us as humans!" 
    And it was in Leto's mind that the speaker had been a servant of computers, one who knew them and serviced them. But the scene vanished and Ghanima stood in front of him, saying: "Gurney knows. He told me. They're Duncan's words and Duncan was speaking as a mentat. 'In doing good, avoid notoriety; in doing evil, avoid self-awareness.'
    That had to be future -- far future. But he felt the reality. It was as intense as any past from his multitude of lives. And he whispered: "Isn't that true, father?"
    But the father-presence within spoke warningly: "Don't invite disaster! You're learning stroboscopic awareness now. Without it you could overrun yourself, lose your place-mark in Time." 
    And the bas-relief imagery persisted. Intrusions hammered at him. Past-present-now. There was no true separation. He knew he had to flow with this thing, but the flowing terrified him. How could he return to any recognizable place? Yet he felt himself being forced to cease every effort of resistance. He could not grasp his new universe in motionless, labeled bits. No bit would stand still. Things could not be forever ordered and formulated. He had to find the rhythm of change and see between the changes to the changing itself. Without knowing where it began he found himself moving within a gigantic moment bienheureux, able to see the past in the future, present in past, the now in both past and future. It was the accumulation of centuries experienced between one heartbeat and the next.
    Leto's awareness floated free, no objective psyche to compensate for consciousness, no barriers. Namri's "provisional future" remained lightly in his memory, but it shared awareness with many futures. And in this shattering awareness, all of his past, every inner life became his own. With the help of the greatest within him, he dominated. They were his.
    He thought: When you study an object from a distance, only its principle may be seen. He had achieved the distance and he could see his own life now: the multi-past and its memories were his burden, his joy, and his necessity. But the worm trip had added another dimension and his father no longer stood guard within him because the need no longer existed. Leto saw through the distances clearly -- past and present. And the past presented him with an ultimate ancestor -- one who was called Harum and without whom the distant future would not be. These clear distances provided new principles, new dimensions of sharing. Whichever life he now chose, he'd live it out in an autonomous sphere of mass experience, a trail of lives so convoluted that no single lifetime could count the generations of it. Aroused, this mass experience held the power to subdue his selfdom. It could make itself felt upon an individual, a nation, a society or an entire civilization. That, of course, was why Gurney had been taught to fear him; why Namri's knife waited. They could not be allowed to see this power within him. No one could ever see it in its fullness -- not even Ghanima.
    Presently Leto sat up, saw that only Namri remained, watching.
    In an old voice, Leto said: "There's no single set of limits for all men. Universal prescience is an empty myth. Only the most powerful local currents of Time may be foretold. But in an infinite universe, local can be so gigantic that your mind shrinks from it." 
    Namri shook his head, not understanding. 
    "Where's Gurney?" Leto asked.
    "He left lest he have to watch me slay you." 
    "Will you slay me, Namri?" It was almost a plea to have the man do it.
    Namri took his hand from his knife. "Since you ask me to do it, I will not. If you were indifferent, though . . ." 
    "The malady of indifference is what destroys many things," Leto said. He nodded to himself. "Yes . . . even civilizations die of it. It's as though that were the price demanded for achieving new levels of complexity or consciousness." He looked up at Namri. "So they told you to look for indifference in me?" And he saw Namri was more than a killer -- Namri was devious. 
    "As a sign of unbridled power," Namri said, but it was a lie.
    "Indifferent power, yes." Leto sat up, sighed deeply. "There was no moral grandeur to my father's life, Namri; only a local trap which he built for himself."

= = = = = =

O Paul, thou Muad'Dib, 
Mahdi of all men, 
Thy breath exhaled 
Sent forth the hurricane.
-Songs of Muad'Dib

    "Never!" Ghanima said. "I'd kill him on our wedding night." She spoke with a barbed stubbornness which thus far had resisted all blandishments. Alia and her advisors had been at it half the night, keeping the royal quarters in a state of unrest, sending out for new advisors, for food and drink. The entire Temple and its adjoining Keep seethed with the frustrations of unmade decisions.
    Ghanima sat composedly on a green floater chair in her own quarters, a large room with rough tan walls to simulate sietch rock. The ceiling, however, was imbar crystal which flickered with blue light, and the floor was black tile. The furnishings were sparse: a small writing table, five floater chairs and a narrow cot set into an alcove, Fremen fashion. Ghanima wore a robe of yellow mourning.
    "You are not a free person who can settle every aspect of her own life," Alia said for perhaps the hundredth time. The little fool must come to realize this sooner or later! She must approve the betrothal to Farad'n. She must! Let her kill him later, but the betrothal requires open acknowledgment by the Fremen affianced.
    "He killed my brother," Ghanima said, holding to the single note which sustained her. "Everyone knows this. Fremen would spit at the mention of my name were I to consent to this betrothal." 
    And that is one of the reasons why you must consent, Alia thought. She said: "His mother did it. He has banished her for it. What more do you want of him?" 
    "His blood," Ghanima said. "He's a Corrino." 
    "He has denounced his own mother," Alia protested. "And why should you worry about the Fremen rabble? They'll accept whatever we tell them to accept. Ghani, the peace of the Empire demands that --"
    "I will not consent," Ghanima said. "You cannot announce the betrothal without me." 
    Irulan, entering the room as Ghanima spoke, glanced inquiringly at Alia and the two female advisors who stood dejectedly beside her. Irulan saw Alia throw up her arms in disgust and drop into a chair facing Ghanima.
    "You speak to her, Irulan," Alia said.
    Irulan pulled a floater into place, sat down beside Alia.
    "You're a Corrino, Irulan," Ghanima said. "Don't press your luck with me." Ghanima got up, crossed to her cot and sat on it cross-legged, glaring back at the women. Irulan, she saw, had dressed in a black aba to match Alia's, the hood thrown back to reveal her golden hair. It was mourning hair under the yellow glow of the floating globes which illuminated the room.
    Irulan glanced at Alia, stood up and crossed to stand facing Ghanima. "Ghani, I'd kill him myself if that were the way to solve matters. And Farad'n's my own blood, as you so kindly emphasized. But you have duties far higher than your commitment to Fremen . . ."
    "That doesn't sound any better coming from you than it does from my precious aunt," Ghanima said. "The blood of a brother cannot be washed off. That's more than some little Fremen aphorism."
    Irulan pressed her lips together. Then: "Farad'n holds your grandmother captive. He holds Duncan and if we don't --" 
    "I'm not satisfied with your stories of how all this happened," Ghanima said, peering past Irulan at Alia. "Once Duncan died rather than let enemies take my father. Perhaps this new ghola-flesh is no longer the same as --"
    "Duncan was charged with protecting your grandmother's life!" Alia said, whirling in her chair. "I'm confident he chose the only way to do that." And she thought: Duncan! Duncan! You weren't supposed to do it this way.
    Ghanima, reading the overtones of contrivance in Alia's voice, stared across at her aunt. "You're lying, O Womb of Heaven. I've heard about your fight with my grandmother. What is it you fear to tell us about her and your precious Duncan?" 
    "You've heard it all," Alia said, but she felt a stab of fear at this bald accusation and what it implied. Fatigue had made her careless, she realized. She arose, said: "Everything I know, you know." Turning to Irulan: "You work on her. She must be made to --"
    Ghanima interrupted with a coarse Fremen expletive which came shockingly from the immature lips. Into the quick silence she said: "You think me just a mere child, that you have years in which to work on me, that eventually I'll accept. Think again, O Heavenly Regent. You know better than anyone the years I have within me. I'll listen to them, not to you."
    Alia barely suppressed an angry retort, stared hard at Ghanima. Abomination? Who was this child? A new fear of Ghanima began to rise in Alia. Had she accepted her own compromise with the lives which came to her pre-born? Alia said: "There's time yet for you to see reason."
    "There may be time yet for me to see Farad'n's blood spurt around my knife," Ghanima said. "Depend on it. If I'm ever left alone with him, one of us will surely die."
    "You think you loved your brother more than I?" Irulan demanded. "You play a fool's game! I was mother to him as I was to you. I was --"
    "You never knew him, "Ghanima said. "All of you, except at times my beloved aunt, persist in thinking us children. You're the fools! Alia knows! Look at her run away from . . ." 
    "I run from nothing," Alia said, but she turned her back on Irulan and Ghanima, and stared at the two amazons who were pretending not to hear this argument. They'd obviously given up on Ghanima. Perhaps they sympathized with her. Angrily, Alia sent them from the room. Relief was obvious on their faces as they obeyed.
    "You run," Ghanima persisted.
    "I've chosen a way of life which suits me," Alia said, turning back to stare at Ghanima sitting cross-legged on the cot. Was it possible she'd made that terrible inner compromise? Alia tried to see the signs of it in Ghanima, but was unable to read a single betrayal. Alia wondered then: Has she seen it in me? But how could she?
    "You feared to be the window for a multitude," Ghanima accused. "But we're the preborn and we know. You'll be their window, conscious or unconscious. You cannot deny them." And she thought: Yes, I know you -- Abomination. And perhaps I'll go as you have gone, but for now I can only pity you and despise you.
    Silence hung between Ghanima and Alia, an almost palpable thing which alerted the Bene Gesserit training in Irulan. She glanced from one to the other, then: "Why're you so quiet suddenly?"
    "I've just had a thought which requires considerable reflection," Alia said.
    "Reflect at your leisure, dear aunt," Ghanima sneered.
    Alia, putting down fatigue-inflamed anger, said: "Enough for now! Leave her to think. Perhaps she'll come to her senses." 
    Irulan arose, said: "It's almost dawn anyway. Ghani, before we go, would you care to hear the latest message from Farad'n? He . . ."
    "I would not," Ghanima said. "And hereafter, cease calling me by that ridiculous diminutive. Ghani! It merely supports the mistaken assumption that I'm a child you can . . ." 
    "Why'd you and Alia grow so suddenly quiet?" Irulan asked, reverting to her previous question, but casting it now in a delicate mode of Voice.
    Ghanima threw her head back in laughter. "Irulan! You'd try Voice on me?" 
    "What?" Irulan was taken aback.
    "You'd teach your grandmother to suck eggs," Ghanima said.
    "I'd what?"
    "The fact that I remember the expression and you've never even heard it before should give you pause," Ghanima said. "It was an old expression of scorn when you Bene Gesserit were young. But if that doesn't chasten you, ask yourself what your royal parents could've been thinking of when they named you Irulan? Or is it Ruinal?"
    In spite of her training, Irulan flushed. "You're trying to goad me, Ghanima."
    "And you tried to use Voice on me. On me! I remember the first human efforts in that direction. I remember then, Ruinous Irulan. Now, get out of here, all of you."
    But Alia was intrigued now, caught by an inner suggestion which sluffed her fatigue aside. She said: "Perhaps I've a suggestion which could change your mind, Ghani."
    "Still Ghani!" A brittle laugh escaped Ghanima, then: "Reflect but a moment: If I desire to kill Farad'n, I need but fall in with your plans. I presume you've thought of that. Beware of Ghani in a tractable mood. You see, I'm being utterly candid with you." 
    "That's what I hoped," Alia said. "If you . . ." 
    "The blood of a brother cannot be washed away," Ghanima said. "I'll not go before my Fremen loved ones a traitor to that. Never to forgive, never to forget. Isn't that our catechism? I warn you here, and I'll say it publicly: you cannot betroth me to Farad'n. Who, knowing me would believe it? Farad'n himself could not believe it. Fremen, hearing of such a betrothal, would laugh into their sleeves and say; 'See! She lures him into a trap.' If you . . ." 
    "I understand that," Alia said, moving to Irulan's side. Irulan, she noted, was standing in shocked silence, aware already of where this conversation was headed.
    "And so I would be luring him into a trap," Ghanima said. "If that's what you want, I'll agree, but he may not fall. If you wish this false betrothal as the empty coin with which to buy back my grandmother and your precious Duncan, so be it. But it's on your head. Buy them back. Farad'n, though, is mine. Him I'll kill." 
    Irulan whirled to face Alia before she could speak. "Alia! If we go back on our word . . ." She let it hang there a moment while Alia smilingly reflected on the potential wrath among the Great Houses in Faufreluches Assembled, the destructive consequences to believe in Atreides honor, the loss of religious trust, all of the great and small building blocs which would tumble.
    "It'd rule against us," Irulan protested. "All belief in Paul's prophethood would be destroyed. It . . . the Empire . . ." 
    "Who could dare question our right to decide what is wrong and what is right?" Alia asked, voice mild. "We mediate between good and evil. I need but proclaim . . ." 
    "You can't do this!" Irulan protested. "Paul's memory . . ." 
    "Is just another tool of Church and State," Ghanima said. "Don't speak foolishness, Irulan." Ghanima touched the crysknife at her waist, looked up at Alia. "I've misjudged my clever aunt, Regent of all that's Holy in Muad'Dib's Empire. I have, indeed, misjudged you. Lure Farad'n into our parlor if you will." 
    "This is recklessness," Irulan pleaded.
    "You agree to this betrothal, Ghanima?" Alia asked, ignoring Irulan.
    "On my terms," Ghanima said, hand still on her crysknife.
    "I wash my hands of this," Irulan said, actually wringing her hands. "I was willing to argue for a true betrothal to heal --" 
    "We'll give you a wound much more difficult to heal, Alia and I," Ghanima said. "Bring him quickly, if he'll come. And perhaps he will. Would he suspect a child of my tender years? Let us plan the formal ceremony of betrothal to require his presence. Let there be an opportunity for me to be alone with him . . . just a minute or two . . ."
    Irulan shuddered at this evidence that Ghanima was, after all, Fremen entire, child no different from adult in this terrible bloodiness. After all, Fremen children were accustomed to slay the wounded on the battlefield, releasing women from this chore that they might collect the bodies and haul them away to the deathstills. And Ghanima, speaking with the voice of a Fremen child, piled horror upon horror by the studied maturity of her words, by the ancient sense of vendetta which hung like an aura around her.
    "Done," Alia said, and she fought to keep voice and face from betraying her glee. "We'll prepare the formal charter of betrothal. We'll have the signatures witnessed by the proper assemblage from the Great Houses. Farad'n cannot possibly doubt --" 
    "He'll doubt, but he'll come," Ghanima said. "And he'll have guards. But will they think to guard him from me?" 
    "For the love of all that Paul tried to do," Irulan protested, "let us at least make Farad'n's death appear an accident, or the result of malice by outside --"
    "I'll take joy in displaying my bloody knife to my brethren," Ghanima said.
    "Alia, I beg you," Irulan said. "Abandon this rash insanity. Declare kanly against Farad'n, anything to --"
    "We don't require formal declaration of vendetta against him," Ghanima said. "The whole Empire knows how we must feel." She pointed to the sleeve of her robe. "We wear the yellow of mourning. When I exchange it for the black of a Fremen betrothed, will that fool anyone?"
    "Pray that it fools Farad'n," Alia said, "and the delegates of the Great Houses we invite to witness the --"
    "Every one of those delegates will turn against you," Irulan said. "You know that!"
    "Excellent point," Ghanima said. "Choose those delegates with care, Alia. They must be ones we won't mind eliminating later."
    Irulan threw up her arms in despair, turned and fled.
    "Have her put under close surveillance lest she try to warn her nephew," Ghanima said.
    "Don't try to teach me how to conduct a plot," Alia said. She turned and followed Irulan, but at a slower pace. The guards outside and the waiting aides were sucked up in her wake like sand particles drawn into the vortex of a rising worm.
    Ghanima shook her head sadly from side to side as the door closed, thought: It's as poor Leto and I thought. Gods below! I wish it'd been me the tiger killed instead of him.

= = = = = =

Many forces sought control of the Atreides twins and, when the death of Leto was announced, this movement of plot and counterplot was amplified. Note the relative motivations: the Sisterhood feared Alia, an adult Abomination, but still wanted those genetic characteristics carried by the Atreides. The Church hierarchy of Auqaf and Hajj saw only the power implicit in control of Muad'Dib's heir. CHOAM wanted a doorway to the wealth of Dune. Farad'n and his Sardaukar sought a return to glory for House Corrino. The Spacing Guild feared the equation Arrakis = melange; without the spice they could not navigate. Jessica wished to repair what her disobedience to the Bene Gesserit had created. Few thought to ask the twins what their plans might be, until it was too late.
-The Book of Kreos

    Shortly after the evening meal, Leto saw a man walking past the arched doorway to his chamber, and his mind went with the man. The passage had been left open and Leto had seen some activity out there -- spice hampers being wheeled past, three women with the obvious off-world sophistication of dress which marked them as smugglers. This man who took Leto's mind walking might have been no different except that he moved like Stilgar, a much younger Stilgar.
    It was a peculiar walk his mind took. Time filled Leto's awareness like a stellar globe. He could see infinite timespaces, but he had to press into his own future before knowing in which moment his flesh lay. His multifaceted memory-lives surged and receded, but they were his now. They were like waves on a beach, but if they rose too high, he could command them and they would retreat, leaving the royal Harum behind.
    Now and again he would listen to those memory-lives. One would rise like a prompter, poking its head up out of the stage and calling cues for his behavior. His father came during the mind-walk and said: "You are a child seeking to be a man. When you are a man, you will seek in vain for the child you were." 
    All the while, he felt his body being plagued by the fleas and lice of an old sietch poorly maintained. None of the attendants who brought his heavily spice-laced food appeared bothered by the creatures. Did these people have immunity from such things, or was it only that they had lived with them so long they could ignore discomfort?
    Who were these people assembled around Gurney? How had they come to this place? Was this Jacurutu? His multi-memories produced answers he did not like. They were ugly people and Gurney was the ugliest. Perfection floated here, though, dormant and waiting beneath an ugly surface.
    Part of him knew he remained spice-bound, held in bondage by the heavy dosages of melange in every meal. His child's body wanted to rebel while her persona raved with the immediate presence of memories carried over from thousands of eons.
    His mind returned from its walk, and he wondered if his body had really stayed behind. Spice confused the senses. He felt the pressures of self-limitations piling up against him like the long barachan dunes of the bled slowly building themselves a ramp against a desert cliff. One day a few trickles of sand would flow over the cliff, then more and more and more . . . and only the sand would remain exposed to the sky.
    But the cliff would still be there underneath. 
    I'm still within the trance, he thought.
    He knew he would come soon to a branching of life and death. His captors kept sending him back into the spice thralldom, unsatisfied with his responses at every return. Always, treacherous Namri waited there with his knife. Leto knew countless pasts and futures, but he had yet to learn what would satisfy Namri . . . or Gurney Halleck. They wanted something outside of the visions. The life and death branching lured Leto. His life, he knew, would have to possess some inner meaning which carried it above the vision circumstances. Thinking of this demand, he felt that his inner awareness was his true being and his outer existence was the trance. This terrified him. He did not want to go back to the sietch with its fleas, its Namri, its Gurney Halleck. 
    I'm a coward, he thought.
    But a coward, even a coward, might die bravely with nothing but a gesture. Where was that gesture which could make him whole once more? How could he awaken from trance and vision into the universe which Gurney demanded? Without that turning, without an awakening from aimless visions, he knew he could die in a prison of his own choosing. In this he had at last come to cooperate with his captors. Somewhere he had to find wisdom, an inner balance which would reflect upon the universe and return to him an image of calm strength. Only then might he seek his Golden Path and survive the skin which was not his own.
    Someone was playing the baliset out there in the sietch. Leto felt that his body probably heard the music in the present. He sensed the cot beneath his back. He could hear music. It was Gurney at the baliset. No other fingers could quite compare with his mastery of that most difficult instrument. He played an old Fremen song, one called a hadith because of its internal narrative and the voice which invoked those patterns required for survival on Arrakis. The song told the story of human occupations within a sietch.
    Leto felt the music move him through a marvelous ancient cavern. He saw women trampling spice residue for fuel, curding the spice for fermentation, forming spice-fabrics. Melange was everywhere in the sietch.
    Those moments came when Leto could not distinguish between the music and the people of the cavern vision. The whine and slap of a power loom was the whine and slap of the baliset. But his inner eyes beheld fabrics of human hair, the long fur of mutated rats, threads of desert cotton, and strips curled from the skin of birds. He saw a sietch school. The eco-language of Dune raged through his mind on its wings of music. He saw the sun-powered kitchen, the long chamber where stillsuits were made and maintained. He saw weather forecasters reading the sticks they'd brought in from the sand.
    Somewhere during this journey, someone brought him food and spooned it into his mouth, holding his head up with a strong arm. He knew this as a real-time sensation, but the marvelous play of motion continued within him.
    As though it came in the next instant after the spice-laden food, he saw the hurtling of a sandstorm. Moving images within the sand breath became the golden reflections of a moth's eyes, and his own life was reduced to the viscous trail of a crawling insect.
    Words from the Panoplia Prophetica raved through him: "It is said that there is nothing firm, nothing balanced, nothing durable in all the universe -- that nothing remains in its state, that each day, some time each hour, brings change."
    The old Missionaria Protectiva knew what they were doing, he thought. They knew about Terrible Purposes. They knew how to manipulate people and religions. Even my father didn't escape them, not in the end.
    There lay the clue he'd been seeking. Leto studied it. He felt strength flowing back into his flesh. His entire multifaceted being turned over and looked out upon the universe. He sat up and found himself alone in the gloomy cell with only the light from the outer passage where the man had walked past and taken his mind an eon ago.
    "Good fortune to us all!" he called in the traditional Fremen way.
    Gurney Halleck appeared in the arched doorway, his head a black silhouette against the light from the outer passage. 
    "Bring light," Leto said. 
    "You wish to be tested further?" 
    Leto laughed. "No. It's my turn to test you." 
    "We shall see." Halleck turned away, returning in a moment with a bright blue glowglobe in the crook of his left elbow. He released it in the cell, allowing it to drift above their heads. 
    "Where's Namri?" Leto asked. 
    "Just outside where I can call him."
    "Ahh, Old Father Eternity always waits patiently," Leto said. He felt curiously released, poised on the edge of discovery.
    "You call Namri by the name reserved for Shai-Hulud?" Halleck asked.
    "His knife's a worm's tooth," Leto said. "Thus, he's Old Father Eternity." 
    Halleck smiled grimly, but remained silent.
    "You still wait to pass judgment on me," Leto said. "And there's no way to exchange information, I'll admit, without making judgments. You can't ask the universe to be exact, though." 
    A rustling sound behind Halleck alerted Leto to Namri's approach. He stopped half a pace to Halleck's left. 
    "Ahhh, the left hand of the damned," Leto said.
    "It's not wise to joke about the Infinite and the Absolute," Namri growled. He glanced sideways at Halleck.
    "Are you God, Namri, that you invoke absolutes?" Leto asked. But he kept his attention on Halleck. Judgment would come from there.
    Both men merely stared at him without answering.
    "Every judgment teeters on the brink of error," Leto explained. "To claim absolute knowledge is to become monstrous. Knowledge is an unending adventure at the edge of uncertainty." 
    "What word game is this you play?" Halleck demanded.
    "Let him speak," Namri said.
    "It's the game Namri initiated with me," Leto said, and saw the old Fremen's head nod agreement. He'd certainly recognized the riddle game. "Our senses always have at least two levels," Leto said.
    "Trivia and message," Namri said.
    "Excellent!" Leto said. "You gave me trivia; I give you message. I see, I hear, I detect odors, I touch; I feel changes in temperature, taste. I sense the passage of time. I may take emotive samples. Ahhhhh! I am happy. You see, Gurney? Namri? There's no mystery about a human life. It's not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be experienced."
    "You try our patience, lad," Namri said. "Is this the place where you wish to die?" 
    But Halleck put out a restraining hand.
    "First, I am not a lad," Leto said. He made the first sign at his right ear. "You'll not slay me; I've placed a water burden upon you."
    Namri drew his crysknife half out of its sheath. "I owe you nothing!"
    "But God created Arrakis to train the faithful," Leto said. "I've not only showed you my faith, I've made you conscious of your own existence. Life requires dispute. You've been made to know -- by me! -- that your reality differs from all others; thus, you know you're alive."
    "Irreverence is a dangerous game to play with me," Namri said. He held his crysknife half drawn.
    "Irreverence is a most necessary ingredient of religion," Leto said. "Not to speak of its importance in philosophy. Irreverence is the only way left to us for testing our universe."
    "So you think you understand the universe?" Halleck asked, and he opened a space between himself and Namri 
    "Ye-esss," Namri said, and there was death in his voice.
    "The universe can be understood only by the wind," Leto said. "There's no mighty seat of reason which dwells within the brain. Creation is discovery. God discovered us in the Void because we moved against a background which He already knew. The wall was blank. Then there was movement." 
    "You play hide and seek with death," Halleck warned.
    "But you are both my friends," Leto said. He faced Namri. "When you offer a candidate as Friend of your Sietch, do you not slay a hawk and an eagle as the offering? And is this not the response: 'God send each man at his end, such hawks, such eagles, and such friends'?"
    Namri's hand slid from his knife. The blade slipped back into its sheath. He stared wide-eyed at Leto. Each sietch kept its friendship ritual secret, yet here was a selected part of the rite. 
    Halleck, though, asked: "Is this place your end?" 
    "I know what you need to hear from me, Gurney," Leto said, watching the play of hope and suspicion across the ugly face. Leto touched his own breast. "This child was never a child. My father lives within me, but he is not me. You loved him, and he was a gallant human whose affairs beat upon high shores. His intent was to close down the cycle of wars, but he reckoned without the movement of infinity as expressed by life. That's Rhajia! Namri knows. Its movement can be seen by any mortal. Beware paths which narrow future possibilities. Such paths divert you from infinity into lethal traps." 
    "What is it I need to hear from you?" Halleck asked.
    "He's just word playing," Namri said, but his voice carried deep hesitation, doubts.
    "I ally myself with Namri against my father," Leto said. "And my father within allies himself with us against what was made of him." 
    "Why?" Halleck demanded.
    "Because it's the amor fati which I bring to humankind, the act of ultimate self-examination. In this universe, I choose to ally myself against any force which brings humiliation upon humankind. Gurney! Gurney! You were not born and raised in the desert. Your flesh doesn't know the truth of which I speak. But Namri knows. In the open land, one direction is as good as another." 
    "I still have not heard what I must hear," Halleck snarled. 
    "He speaks for war and against peace," Namri said.
    "No," Leto said. "Nor did my father speak against war. But look what was made of him. Peace has only one meaning in this Imperium. It's the maintenance of a single way of life. You are commanded to be contented. Life must be uniform on all planets as it is in the Imperial Government. The major object of priestly study is to find the correct forms of human behavior. For this they go to the words of Muad'Dib! Tell me, Namri, are you content?" 
    "No." The words came out flat, spontaneous rejection. 
    "Then do you blaspheme?" 
    "Of course not!"
    "But you aren't contented. You see, Gurney? Namri proves it to us. Every question, every problem doesn't have a single correct answer. One must permit diversity. A monolith is unstable. Then why do you demand a single correct statement from me? Is that to be the measure of your monstrous judgment?"
    "Will you force me to have you slain?" Halleck asked, and there was agony in his voice.
    "No, I'll have pity upon you," Leto said. "Send word to my grandmother that I'll cooperate. The Sisterhood may come to regret my cooperation, but an Atreides gives his word." 
    "A Truthsayer should test that," Namri said. "These Atreides . . ."
    "He'll have his chance to say before his grandmother what must be said," Halleck said. He nodded with his head toward the passage.
    Namri paused before leaving, glanced at Leto. "I pray we do the right thing in leaving him alive." 
    "Go, friends," Leto said. "Go and reflect." 
    As the two men departed, Leto threw himself onto his back, feeling the cold cot against his spine. Movement sent his head spinning over the edge of his spice-burdened consciousness. In that instant he saw the entire planet -- every village, every town, every city, the desert places and the planted places. All of the shapes which smashed against his vision bore intimate relationships to a mixture of elements within themselves and without. He saw the structures of Imperial society reflected in physical structures of its planets and their communities. Like a gigantic unfolding within him, he saw this revelation for what it must be: a window into the society's invisible parts. Seeing this, Leto realized that every system had such a window. Even the system of himself and his universe. He began peering into windows, a cosmic voyeur.
    This was what his grandmother and the Sisterhood sought! He knew it. His awareness flowed on a new, higher level. He felt the past carried in his cells, in his memories, in the archetypes which haunted his assumptions, in the myths which hemmed him, in his languages and their prehistoric detritus. It was all of the shapes out of his human and nonhuman past, all of the lives which he now commanded, all integrated in him at last. And he felt himself as a thing caught up in the ebb and flow of nucleotides. Against the backdrop of infinity he was a protozoan creature in which birth and death were virtually simultaneous, but he was both infinite and protozoan, a creature of molecular memories.
    We humans are a form of colony organism! he thought.
    They wanted his cooperation. Promising cooperation had won him another reprieve from Namri's knife. By summoning to cooperation, they sought to recognize a healer.
    And he thought: But I'll not bring them social order in the way they expect it!
    A grimace contorted Leto's mouth. He knew he'd not be as unconsciously malevolent as was his father -- despotism at one terminal and slavery at the other -- but this universe might pray for those "good old days."
    His father-within spoke to him then, cautiously probing, unable to demand attention but pleading for audience.
    And Leto answered: "No. We will give them complexities to occupy their minds. There are many modes of flight from danger. How will they know I'm dangerous unless they experience me for thousands of years? Yes, father-within, we'll give them question marks."

= = = = = =

There is no guilt or innocence in you. All of that is past. Guilt belabors the dead and I am not the Iron Hammer. You multitude of the dead are merely people who have done certain things, and the memory of those things illuminates my path.
-Leto II to His Memory-Lives, After Harq al-Ada

    "It moves of itself!" Farad'n said, and his voice was barely a whisper.
    He stood above the Lady Jessica's bed, a brace of guards close behind him. The Lady Jessica had propped herself up in the bed. She was clad in a parasilk gown of shimmering white with a matching band around her copper hair. Farad'n had come bursting in upon her moments before. He wore the grey leotard and his face was sweaty with excitement and the exertions of his dash through the palace corridors.
    "What time is it?" Jessica asked. 
    "Time?" Farad'n appeared puzzled.
    One of the guards spoke up: "It is the third hour past midnight, My Lady." The guard glanced fearfully at Farad'n. The young prince had come dashing through the night-lighted corridors, picking up startled guards in his wake.
    "But it moves," Farad'n said. He held out his left hand, then his right. "I saw my own hands shrink into chubby fists, and I remembered! They were my hands when I was an infant. I remembered being an infant, but it was . . . a clearer memory. I was reorganizing my old memories!"
    "Very good," Jessica said. His excitement was infectious. "And what happened when your hands became old?" 
    "My . . . mind was . . . sluggish," he said. "I felt an ache in my back. Right here." He touched a place over his left kidney.
    "You've learned a most important lesson," Jessica said. "Do you know what that lesson is?"
    He dropped his hands to his sides, stared at her. Then: "My mind controls my reality." His eyes glittered, and he repeated it, louder this time: "My mind controls my reality!"
    "That is the beginning of prana-bindu balance," Jessica said. "It is only the beginning, though." 
    "What do I do next?" he asked.
    "My Lady," the guard who had answered her question ventured now to interrupt. "The hour," he said.
    Aren't their spy posts manned at this hour? Jessica wondered. She said: "Begone. We have work to do."
    "But My Lady," the guard said, and he looked fearfully from Farad'n to Jessica and back.
    "You think I'm going to seduce him?" Jessica asked. 
    The man stiffened.
    Farad'n laughed, a joyous outburst. He waved a hand in dismissal. "You heard her. Begone." 
    The guards looked at each other, but they obeyed.
    Farad'n sat on the edge of her bed. "What next?" He shook his head. "I wanted to believe you, yet I did not believe. Then . . . it was as though my mind melted. I was tired. My mind gave up its fighting against you. It happened. Just like that!" He snapped his fingers.
    "It was not me that your mind fought against," Jessica said.
    "Of course not," he admitted. "I was fighting against myself, all the nonsense I've learned. What next now?"
    Jessica smiled. "I confess I didn't expect you to succeed this rapidly. It's been only eight days and . . ." 
    "I was patient," he said, grinning.
    "And you've begun to learn patience, too," she said. 
    "Begun?"
    "You've just crept over the lip of this learning," she said. "Now you're truly an infant. Before . . . you were only a potential, not even born." 
    The corners of his mouth drew down.
    "Don't be so gloomy," she said. "You've done it. That's important. How many can say they were born anew?" 
    "What comes next?" he insisted.
    "You will practice this thing you've learned," she said. "I want you able to do this at will, easily. Later you'll fill a new place in your awareness which this has opened. It will be filled by the ability to test any reality against your own demands." 
    "Is that all I do now . . . practice the --"
    "No. Now you can begin the muscle training. Tell me, can you move the little toe on your left foot without moving any other muscle of your body?"
    "My . . ." She saw a distant expression come over his face as he tried to move the toe. He looked down at his foot presently, staring at it. Sweat broke out on his forehead. A deep breath escaped him. "I can't do it."
    "Yes you can," she said. "You will learn to do it. You will learn every muscle in your body. You will know these muscles the way you know your hands."
    He swallowed hard at the magnitude of this prospect. Then: "What are you doing to me? What is your plan for me?" 
    "I intend to turn you loose upon the universe," she said. "You will become whatever it is you most deeply desire." 
    He mulled this for a moment. "Whatever I desire?" 
    "Yes." 
    "That's impossible!"
    "Unless you learn to control your desires the way you control your reality," she said. And she thought: There! Let his analysis examine that. They'll advise cautious approval, but Farad'n will move a step closer to realization of what I'm really doing.
    He proved his surmise by saying: "It's one thing to tell a person he'll realize his heart's desire. It's another thing to actually deliver that realization."
    "You've come farther than I thought," Jessica said. "Very good. I promise you: if you complete this program of learning, you'll be your own man. Whatever you do, it'll be because that's what you want to do." 
    And let a Truthsayer try to pry that apart, she thought.
    He stood up, but the expression he bent upon her was warm, a sense of camaraderie in it. "You know, I believe you. Damned if I know why, but I do. And I won't say a word about the other things I'm thinking."
    Jessica watched his retreating back as he let himself out of her bedchamber. She turned off the glowglobes, lay back. This Farad'n was a deep one. He'd as much as told her that he was beginning to see her design, but he was joining her conspiracy of his own volition.
    Wait until he begins to learn his own emotions, she thought. With that, she composed herself for the return to sleep. The morrow, she knew, would be plagued by casual encounters with palace personnel asking seemingly innocuous questions. 

= = = = = =

Humankind periodically goes through a speedup of its affairs, thereby experiencing the race between the renewable vitality of the living and the beckoning vitiation of decadence. In this periodic race, any pause becomes luxury. Only then can one reflect that all is permitted; all is possible.
-The Apocrypha of Muad'Dib

    The touch of sand is important, Leto told himself.
    He could feel the grit beneath him where he sat beneath a brilliant sky. They had force-fed him another heavy dosage of melange, and Leto's mind turned upon itself like a whirlpool. An unanswered question lay deep within the funnel of the whirlpool: Why do they insist that I say it? Gurney was stubborn; no doubt of that. And he'd had his orders from his Lady Jessica.
    They'd brought him out of the sietch into the daylight for this "lesson." He had the strange sensation that he'd let his body take the short trip from the sietch while his inner being mediated a battle between the Duke Leto I and the old Baron Harkonnen. They'd fought within him, through him, because he would not let them communicate directly. The fight had taught him what had happened to Alia. Poor Alia.
    I was right to fear the spice trip, he thought.
    A welling bitterness toward the Lady Jessica filled him. Her damned gom jabbar! Fight it and win, or die in the attempt. She couldn't put a poisoned needle against his neck, but she could send him into the valley of peril which had claimed her own daughter.
    Snuffling sounds intruded upon his awareness. They wavered, growing louder, then softer, louder . . . softer. There was no way for him to determine whether they had current reality or came from the spice.
    Leto's body sagged over his folded arms. He felt hot sand through his buttocks. There was a rug directly in front of him, but he sat on open sand. A shadow lay across the rug: Namri. Leto stared into the muddy pattern of the rug, feeling bubbles ripple there. His awareness drifted on its own current through a landscape which stretched out to a horizon of shock-headed greenery.
    His skull thrummed with drums. He felt heat, fever. The fever was a pressure of burning which filled his senses, crowding out awareness of flesh until he could only feel the moving shadows of his peril. Namri and the knife. Pressure . . . pressure . . . Leto lay at last suspended between sky and sand, his mind lost to all but the fever. Now he waited for something to happen, sensing that any occurrence would be a first-and-only thing.
    Hot-hot pounding sunshine crashed brilliantly around him, without tranquillity, without remedy. Where is my Golden Path? Everywhere bugs crawled. Everywhere. My skin is not my own. He sent messages along his nerves, waited out the dragging other-person responses.
    Up head, he told his nerves.
    A head which might have been his own crept upward, looked out at patches of blankness in the bright light. 
    Someone whispered: "He's deep into it now." 
    No answer.
    Burn fire sun building heat on heat.
    Slowly, outbending, the current of his awareness took him drifting through a last screen of green blankness and there, across low folding dunes, distant no more than a kilometer beyond the stretched out chalk line of a cliff, there lay the green burgeoning future, upflung, flowing into endless green, greenswelling, green-green moving outward endlessly.
    In all of that green there was not one great worm. 
    Riches of wild growth, but nowhere Shai-Hulud.
    Leto sensed that he had ventured across old boundaries into a new land which only the imagination had witnessed, and that he looked now directly through the very next veil which a yawning humankind called Unknown. 
    It was bloodthirsty reality.
    He felt the red fruit of his life swaying on a limb, fluid slipping away from him, and the fluid was the spice essence flowing through his veins.
    Without Shai-Hulud, no more spice.
    He had seen a future without the great grey worm-serpent of Dune. He knew this, yet could not tear himself from the trance to rail against such a passage.
    Abruptly his awareness plunged back -- back, back, away from such a deadly future. His thoughts went into his bowels, becoming primitive, moved only by intense emotions. He found himself unable to focus on any particular aspect of his vision or his surroundings, but there was a voice within him. It spoke an ancient language and he understood it perfectly. The voice was musical and lilting, but its words bludgeoned him.
    "It is not the present which influences the future, thou fool, but the future which forms the present. You have it all backward. Since the future is set, an unfolding of events which will assure that future is fixed and inevitable."
    The words transfixed him. He felt terror rooted in the heavy matter of his body. By this he knew his body still existed, but the reckless nature and enormous power of his vision left him feeling contaminated, defenseless, unable to signal a muscle and gain its obedience. He knew he was submitting more and more to the onslaught of those collective lives whose memories once had made him believe he was real. Fear filled him. He thought that he might be losing the inner command, falling at last into Abomination. 
    Leto felt his body twisting in terror.
    He had come to depend upon his victory and the newly won benevolent cooperation of those memories. They had turned against him, all of them -- even royal Harum whom he'd trusted. He lay shimmering on a surface which had no roots, unable to give any expression to his own life. He tried to concentrate upon a mental picture of himself, was confronted by overlapping frames, each a different age: infant into doddering ancient. He recalled his father's early training: Let the hands grow young, then old. But his whole body was immersed now in this lost reality and the entire image progression melted into other faces, the features of those who had given him their memories.
    A diamond thunderbolt shattered him.
    Leto felt pieces of his awareness drifting apart, yet he retained a sense of himself somewhere between being and nonbeing. Hope quickening, he felt his body breathing. In . . . Out. He took in a deep breath: yin. He let it out: yang.
    Somewhere just beyond his grasp lay a place of supreme independence, a victory over all of the confusions inherent in his multitude of lives -- no false sense of command, but a true victory. He knew his previous mistake now: he had sought power in the reality of his trance, choosing that rather than face the fears which he and Ghanima had fed in each other. 
    Fear defeated Alia!
    But the seeking after power spread another trap, diverting him into fantasy. He saw the illusion. The entire illusion process rotated half a turn and now he knew a center from which he could watch without purpose the flight of his visions, of his inner lives.
    Elation flooded him. It made him want to laugh, but he denied himself this luxury, knowing it would bar the doors of memory.
    Ahhhh, my memories, he thought. I have seen your illusion. You no longer invent the next moment for me. You merely show me how to create new moments. I'll not lock myself on the old tracks.
    This thought passed through his awareness as though wiping a surface clean and in its wake he felt his entire body, an einfalle which reported in most minute detail on every cell, every nerve. He entered a state of intense quiet. In this quiet, he heard voices, knowing they came from a great distance, but he heard them clearly as though they echoed in a chasm.
    One of the voices was Halleck's. "Perhaps we gave him too much of it."
    Namri answered. "We gave him exactly what she told us to give him."
    "Perhaps we should go back out there and have another look at him." Halleck.
    "Sabiha is good at such things; she'll call us if anything starts to go wrong." Namri.
    "I don't like this business of Sabiha." Halleck. 
    "She's a necessary ingredient." Namri.
    Leto felt bright light outside himself and darkness within, but the darkness was secretive, protective, and warm. The light began to blaze up and he felt that it came from the darkness within, swirling outward like a brilliant cloud. His body became transparent, drawing him upward, yet he retained that einfalle contact with every cell and nerve. The multitude of inner lives fell into alignment, nothing tangled or mixed. They became very quiet in duplication of his own inner silence, each memory-life discrete, an entity incorporeal and undivided.
    Leto spoke to them then: "I am your spirit. I am the only life you can realize. I am the house of your spirit in the land which is nowhere, the land which is your only remaining home. Without me, the intelligible universe reverts to chaos. Creative and abysmal are inextricably linked in me; only I can mediate between them. Without me, mankind will sink into the mire and vanity of knowing. Through me, you and they will find the only way out of chaos: understanding by living."
    With this he let go of himself and became himself, his own person compassing the entirety of his past. It was not victory, not defeat, but a new thing to be shared with any inner life he chose. Leto savored this newness, letting it possess every cell, every nerve, giving up what the einfalle had presented to him and recovering the totality in the same instant.
    After a time, he awoke in white darkness. With a flash of awareness he knew where his flesh was: seated on sand about a kilometer from the cliff wall which marked the northern boundary of the sietch. He knew that sietch now: Jacurutu for certain . . . and Fondak. But it was far different from the myths and legends and the rumors which the smugglers allowed.
    A young woman sat on a rug directly in front of him, a bright glowglobe anchored to her left sleeve and drifting just above her head. When Leto looked away from the glowglobe, there were stars. He knew this young woman; she was the one from his vision earlier, the roaster of coffee. She was Namri's niece, as ready with a knife as Namri was. There was the knife in her lap. She wore a simple green robe over a grey stillsuit. Sabiha, that was her name. And Namri had his own plans for her.
    Sabiha saw the awakening in his eyes, said: "It's almost dawn. You've spent the whole night here." 
    "And most of a day," he said. "You make good coffee." 
    This statement puzzled her, but she ignored it with a single-mindedness which spoke of harsh training and explicit instructions for her present behavior.
    "It's the hour of assassins," Leto said. "But your knife is no longer needed." He glanced at the crysknife in her lap. 
    "Namri will be the judge of that," she said. 
    Not Halleck, then. She only confirmed his inner knowledge.
    "Shai-Hulud is a great garbage collector and eraser of unwanted evidence," Leto said. "I've used him thus myself." 
    She rested her hand lightly on the knife handle.
    "How much is revealed by where we sit and how we sit," he said. "You sit upon the rug and I upon the sand." 
    Her hand closed over the knife handle.
    Leto yawned, a gaping and stretching which made his jaws ache. "I've had a vision which included you," he said. 
    Her shoulders relaxed slightly.
    "We've been very one-sided about Arrakis," he said. "Barbaric of us. There's a certain momentum in what we've been doing, but now we must undo some of our work. The scales must be brought into better balance." 
    A puzzled frown touched Sabiha's face.
    "My vision," he said. "Unless we restore the dance of life here on Dune, the dragon on the floor of the desert will be no more."
    Because he'd used the Old Fremen name for the great worm, she was a moment understanding him. Then: "The worms?" 
    "We're in a dark passage," he said. "Without spice, the Empire falls apart. The Guild will not move. Planets will slowly lose their clear memories of each other. They'll turn inward upon themselves. Space will become a boundary when the Guild navigators lose their mastery. We'll cling to our dunetops and be ignorant of that which is above us and below us." 
    "You speak very strangely," she said. "How have you seen me in your vision?"
    Trust Fremen superstition! he thought. He said: "I've become pasigraphic. I'm a living glyph to write out the changes which must come to pass. If I do not write them, you'll encounter such heartache as no human should experience."
    "What words are these?" she asked, but her hand remained lightly on the knife.
    Leto turned his head toward the cliffs of Jacurutu, seeing the beginning glow which would be Second Moon making its predawn passage behind the rocks. The death-scream of a desert hare shocked its way through him. He saw Sabiha shudder. There came the beating of wings -- a predator bird, night creature here. He saw the ember glow of many eyes as they swept past above him, headed for crannies in the cliff.
    "I must follow the dictates of my new heart," Leto said. "You look upon me as a mere child, Sabiha, but if --"
    "They warned me about you," Sabiha said, and now her shoulders were stiff with readiness.
    He heard the fear in her voice, said: "Don't fear me, Sabiha. You've lived eight more years than this flesh of mine. For that, I honor you. But I have untold thousands more years of other lives, far more than you have known. Don't look upon me as a child. I have bridged the many futures and, in one, saw us entwined in love. You and I, Sabiha." 
    "What are . . . This can't . . . " She broke off in confusion.
    "The idea could grow on you," he said. "Now help me back to the sietch, for I've been in far places and am weak with the weariness of my travels. Namri must hear where I have been." 
    He saw the indecision in her, said: "Am I not the Guest of the Cavern? Namri must learn what I have learned. We have many things to do lest our universe degenerate."
    "I don't believe that . . . about the worms," she said. 
    "Nor about us entwined in love?"
    She shook her head. But he could see the thoughts drifting through her mind like windblown feathers. His words both attracted and repelled her. To be consort of power, that certainly carried high allure. Yet there were her uncle's orders. But one day this son of Muad'Dib might rule here on Dune and in the farthest reaches of their universe. She encountered then an extremely Fremen, cavern-hiding aversion to such a future. The consort of Leto would be seen by everyone, would be an object of gossip and speculations. She could have wealth, though, and . . .
    "I am the son of Muad'Dib, able to see the future," he said.
    Slowly she replaced her knife in its sheath, lifted herself easily from the rug, crossed to his side and helped him to his feet. Leto found himself amused by her actions then: she folded the rug neatly and draped it across her right shoulder. He saw her measuring the difference in their sizes, reflecting upon his words: Entwined in love?
    Size is another thing that changes, he thought.
    She put a hand on his arm then to help him and control him. He stumbled and she spoke sharply: "We're too far from the sietch for that!" Meaning the unwanted sound which might attract a worm.
    Leto felt that his body had become a dry shell like that abandoned by an insect. He knew this shell: it was one with the society which had been built upon the melange trade and its Religion of the Golden Elixir. It was emptied by its excesses. Muad'Dib's high aims had fallen into wizardry which was enforced by the military arm of Auqaf. Muad'Dib's religion had another name now; it was Shien-san-Shao, an Ixian label which designated the intensity and insanity of those who thought they could bring the universe to paradise at the point of a crysknife. But that too would change as lx had changed. For they were merely the ninth planet of their sun, and had even forgotten the language which had given them their name. 
    "The Jihad was a kind of mass insanity," he muttered.
    "What?" Sabiha had been concentrating on the problem of making him walk without rhythm, hiding their presence out here on open sand. She was a moment focusing on his words, then interpreted them as another product of his obvious fatigue. She felt the weakness of him, the way he'd been drained by the trance. It seemed pointless and cruel to her. If he were to be killed as Namri said, then it should be done quickly without all of this by-play. Leto had spoken of a marvelous revelation, though. Perhaps that was what Namri sought. Certainly that must be the motive behind the behavior of this child's own grandmother. Why else would Our Lady of Dune give her sanction to these perilous acts against a child?
    Child?
    Again she reflected upon his words. They were at the cliff base now and she stopped her charge, letting him relax a moment here where it was safer. Looking down at him in the dim starlight, she asked: "How could there be no more worms?"
    "Only I can change that," he said. "Have no fear. I can change anything." 
    "But it's--"
    "Some questions have no answers," he said. "I've seen that future, but the contradictions would only confuse you. This is a changing universe and we are the strangest change of all. We resonate to many influences. Our futures need constant updating. Now, there's a barrier which we must remove. This requires that we do brutal things, that we go against our most basic, our dearest wishes . . . But it must be done." 
    "What must be done?"
    "Have you ever killed a friend?" he asked and, turning, led the way into the gap which sloped upward to the sietch's hidden entrance. He moved as quickly as his trance-fatigue would permit, but she was right behind him, clutching his robe and pulling him to a stop.
    "What's this of killing a friend?"
    "He'll die anyway," Leto said. "I don't have to do it, but I could prevent it. If I don't prevent it, is that not killing him?" 
    "Who is this . . . who will die?"
    "The alternative keeps me silent," he said. "I might have to give my sister to a monster."
    Again he turned away from her, and this time when she pulled at his robe he resisted, refusing to answer her questions. Best she not know until the time comes, he thought.

= = = = = =

Natural selection has been described as an environment selectively screening for those who will have progeny. Where humans are concerned, though, this is an extremely limiting viewpoint. Reproduction by sex tends toward experiment and innovation. It raises many questions, including the ancient one about whether environment is a selective agent after the variation occurs, or whether environment plays a pre-selective role in determining the variations which it screens. Dune did not realty answer those questions: it merely raised new questions which Leto and the Sisterhood may attempt to answer over the next five hundred generations.
-The Dune Catastrophe, After Harq al-Ada

    The bare brown rocks of the Shield Wall loomed in the distance, visible to Ghanima as the embodiment of that apparition which threatened her future. She stood at the edge of the roof garden atop the Keep, the setting sun at her back. The sun held a deep orange glow from intervening dust clouds, a color as rich as the rim of a worm's mouth. She sighed, thinking: Alia . . . Alia . . . Is your fate to be my fate?
    The inner lives had grown increasingly clamorous of late. There was something about female conditioning in a Fremen society -- perhaps it was a real sexual difference, but whatever -- the female was more susceptible to that inner tide. Her grandmother had warned about it as they'd schemed, drawing on the accumulated wisdom of the Bene Gesserit but awakening that wisdom's threats within Ghanima.
    "Abomination;" the Lady Jessica had said, "our term for the pre-born, has a long history of bitter experiences behind it. The way of it seems to be that the inner lives divide. They split into the benign and the malignant. The benign remain tractable, useful. The malignant appear to unite in one powerful psyche, trying to take over the living flesh and its consciousness. The process is known to take considerable time, but its signs are well known." 
    "Why did you abandon Alia?" Ghanima asked.
    "I fled in terror of what I'd created," Jessica said, her voice low. "I gave up. And my burden now is that . . . perhaps I gave up too soon." 
    "What do you mean?"
    "I cannot explain yet, but . . . maybe . . . no! I'll not give you false hopes. Ghafla, the abominable distraction, has a long history in human mythology. It was called many things, but chiefly it was called possession. That's what it seems to be. You lose your way in the malignancy and it takes possession of you."
    "Leto . . . feared the spice," Ghanima said, finding that she could talk about him quietly. The terrible price demanded of them! 
    "And wisely," Jessica had said. She would say no more.
    But Ghanima had risked an explosion of her inner memories, peering past an odd blurred veil and futilely expanding on the Bene Gesserit fears. To explain what had befallen Alia did not ease it one bit. The Bene Gesserit accumulation of experience had pointed to a possible way out of the trap, though, and when Ghanima ventured the inner sharing, she first called upon the Mohalata, a partnership of the benign which might protect her.
    She recalled that sharing as she stood in the sunset glow at the edge of the Keep's roof garden. Immediately she felt the memory-presence of her mother. Chani stood there, an apparition between Ghanima and the distant cliffs.
    "Enter here and you will eat the fruit of the Zaqquum, the food of hell!" Chani said. "Bar this door, my daughter; it is your only safety."
    The inner clamor lifted itself around the vision and Ghanima fled, sinking her consciousness into the Sisterhood's Credo, reacting out of desperation more than trust. Quickly she recited the Credo, moving her lips, letting her voice rise to a whisper:
    "Religion is the emulation of the adult by the child. Religion is the encystment of past beliefs: mythology, which is guesswork, the hidden assumptions of trust in the universe, those pronouncements which men have made in search of personal power, all of it mingled with shreds of enlightenment. And always the ultimate unspoken commandment is 'Thou shall not question!' But we question. We break that commandment as a matter of course. The work to which we have set ourselves is the liberating of the imagination, the harnessing of imagination to humankind's deepest sense of creativity."
    Slowly a sense of order returned to Ghanima's thoughts. She felt her body trembling, though, and knew how fragile was this peace she had attained -- and that blurring veil remained in her mind.
    "Leb Kamai," she whispered. "Heart of my enemy, you shall not be my heart."
    And she called up a memory of Farad'n's features, the saturnine young face with its heavy brows and firm mouth.
    Hate will make me strong, she thought. In hate, I can resist Alia's fate.
    But the trembling fragility of her position remained, and all she could think about was how much Farad'n resembled his uncle, the late Shaddam IV.
    "Here you are!"
    It was Irulan coming up from Ghanima's right, striding along the parapet with movements reminiscent of a man. Turning, Ghanima thought: And she's Shaddam's daughter.
    "Why will you persist in sneaking out alone?" Irulan demanded, stopping in front of Ghanima and towering over her with a scowling face.
    Ghanima refrained from saying that she was not alone, that guards had seen her emerge onto the roof. Irulan's anger went to the fact that they were in the open here and that a distant weapon might find them.
    "You're not wearing a stillsuit," Ghanima said. "Did you know that in the old days someone caught outside the sietch without a stillsuit was automatically killed. To waste water was to endanger the tribe."
    "Water! Water!" Irulan snapped. "I want to know why you endanger yourself this way. Come back inside. You make trouble for all of us."
    "What danger is there now?" Ghanima asked. "Stilgar has purged the traitors. Alia's guards are everywhere." 
    Irulan peered upward at the darkening sky. Stars were already visible against a grey-blue backdrop. She returned her attention to Ghanima. "I won't argue. I was sent to tell you we have word from Farad'n. He accepts, but for some reason he wishes to delay the ceremony." 
    "How long?"
    "We don't know yet. It's being negotiated. But Duncan is being sent home." 
    "And my grandmother?" 
    "She chooses to stay on Salusa for the time being." 
    "Who can blame her?" Ghanima asked.
    "That silly fight with Alia!"
    "Don't try to gull me, Irulan! That was no silly fight. I've heard the stories." 
    "The Sisterhood's fears --"
    "Are real," Ghanima said. "Well, you've delivered your message. Will you use this opportunity to have another try at dissuading me?" 
    "I've given up."
    "You should know better than to try lying to me," Ghanima said.
    "Very well! I'll keep trying to dissuade you. This course is madness." And Irulan wondered why she let Ghanima become so irritating. A Bene Gesserit didn't need to be irritated at anything. She said: "I'm concerned by the extreme danger to you. You know that. Ghani, Ghani . . . you're Paul's daughter. How can you --" 
    "Because I'm his daughter," Ghanima said. "We Atreides go back to Agamemnon and we know what's in our blood. Never forget that, childless wife of my father. We Atreides have a bloody history and we're not through with the blood." 
    Distracted, Irulan asked: "Who's Agamemnon?" 
    "How sparse your vaunted Bene Gesserit education proves itself," Ghanima said. "I keep forgetting that you foreshorten history. But my memories go back to . . ." She broke off; best not to arouse those shades from their fragile sleep.
    "Whatever you remember," Irulan said, "you must know how dangerous this course is to --" 
    "I'll kill him," Ghanima said. "He owes me a life." 
    "And I'll prevent it if I can."
    "We already know this. You won't get the opportunity. Alia is sending you south to one of the new towns until after it's done." 
    Irulan shook her head in dismay. "Ghani, I took my oath that I'd guard you against any danger. I'll do it with my own life if necessary. If you think I'm going to languish in some brickwalled djedida while you . . ."
    "There's always the Huanui," Ghanima said, speaking softly. "We have the deathstill as an alternative. I'm sure you couldn't interfere from there."
    Irulan paled, put a hand to her mouth, forgetting for a moment all of her training. It was a measure of how much care she had invested in Ghanima, this almost complete abandonment of everything except animal fear. She spoke out of that shattering emotion, allowing it to tremble on her lips. "Ghani, I don't fear for myself. I'd throw myself into the worm's mouth for you. Yes, I'm what you call me, the childless wife of your father, but you're the child I never had. I beg you . . ." Tears glistened at the corners of her eyes.
    Ghanima fought down a tightness in her throat, said: "There is another difference between us. You were never Fremen. I'm nothing else. This is a chasm which divides us. Alia knows. Whatever else she may be, she knows this."
    "You can't tell what Alia knows," Irulan said, speaking bitterly. "If I didn't know her for Atreides, I'd swear she has set herself to destroy her own Family."
    And how do you know she's still Atreides? Ghanima thought, wondering at this blindness in Irulan. This was a Bene Gesserit, and who knew better than they the history of Abomination? She would not let herself even think about it, let alone believe it. Alia must have worked some witchery on this poor woman.
    Ghanima said: "I owe you a water debt. For that, I'll guard your life. But your cousin's forfeit. Say no more of that." 
    Irulan stilled the trembling of her lips, wiped her eyes. "I did love your father," she whispered. "I didn't even know it until he was dead." 
    "Perhaps he isn't dead," Ghanima said. "This Preacher . . ." 
    "Ghani! Sometimes I don't understand you. Would Paul attack his own family?"
    Ghanima shrugged, looked out at the darkening sky. "He might find amusement in such a --" 
    "How can you speak so lightly of this --"
    "To keep away the dark depths," Ghanima said. "I don't taunt you. The gods know I don't. But I'm just my father's daughter. I'm every person who's contributed seed to the Atreides. You won't think of Abomination, but I can't think of anything else. I'm the pre-born. I know what's within me." 
    "That foolish old superstition about --"
    "Don't!" Ghanima reached a hand toward Irulan's mouth. "I'm every Bene Gesserit of their damnable breeding program up to and including my grandmother. And I'm very much more." She tore at her left palm, drawing blood with a fingernail. "This is a young body, but its experiences . . . Oh, gods. Irulan! My experiences! No!" She put out her hand once more as Irulan moved closer. "I know all of those futures which my father explored. I've the wisdom of so many lifetimes, and all the ignorance, too . . . all the frailties. If you'd help me, Irulan, first learn who I am." 
    Instinctively Irulan bent and gathered Ghanima into her arms, holding her close, cheek against cheek.
    Don't let me have to kill this woman. Ghanima thought. Don't let that happen.
    As this thought swept through her, the whole desert passed into night.

= = = = = =

One small bird has called thee 
From a beak streaked crimson. 
It cried once over Sietch Tabr 
And thou went forth unto Funeral Plain.
-Lament for Leto II

    Leto awoke to the tinkle of water rings in a woman's hair. He looked to the open doorway of his cell and saw Sabiha sitting there. In the half-immersed awareness of the spice he saw her outlined by all that his vision revealed about her. She was two years past the age when most Fremen women were wed or at least betrothed. Therefore her family was saving her for something . . . or someone. She was nubile . . . obviously. His vision-shrouded eyes saw her as a creature out of humankind's Terranic past: dark hair and pale skin, deep sockets which gave her blue-in-blue eyes a greenish cast. She possessed a small nose and a wide mouth above a sharp chin. And she was a living signal to him that the Bene Gesserit plan was known -- or suspected -- here in Jacurutu. So they hoped to revive Pharaonic Imperialism through him, did they? Then what was their design to force him into marrying his sister? Surely Sabiha could not prevent that.
    His captors knew the plan, though. And how had they learned it? They'd not shared its vision. They'd not gone with him where life became a moving membrane in other dimensions. The reflexive and circular subjectivity of the visions which revealed Sabiha were his and his alone.
    Again the water rings tinkled in Sabiha's hair and the sound stirred up his visions. He knew where he had been and what he had learned. Nothing could erase that. He was not riding a great Maker palanquin now, the tinkle of water rings among the passengers a rhythm for their passage songs. No . . . He was here in the cell of Jacurutu, embarked on that most dangerous of all journeys: away from and back to the Ahl as-sunna wal-jamas, from the real world of the senses and back to that world.
    What was she doing there with the water rings tinkling in her hair? Oh, yes. She was mixing more of the brew which they thought held him captive: food laced with spice essence to keep him half in and half out of the real universe until either he died or his grandmother's plan succeeded. And every time he thought he'd won, they sent him back. The Lady Jessica was right, of course -- that old witch! But what a thing to do. The total recall of all those lives within him was of no use at all until he could organize the data and remember it at will. Those lives had been the raw stuff of anarchy. One or all of them could have overwhelmed him. The spice and its peculiar setting here in Jacurutu had been a desperate gamble.
    Now Gurney waits for the sign and I refuse to give it to him. How long will his patience last?
    He stared out at Sabiha. She'd thrown her hood back and revealed the tribal tattoos at her temples. Leto did not recognize the tattoos at first, then remembered where he was. Yes, Jacurutu still lived.
    Leto did not know whether to be thankful toward his grandmother or hate her. She wanted him to have conscious-level instincts. But instincts were only racial memories of how to handle crises. His direct memories of those other lives told him far more than that. He had it all organized now, and could see the peril of revealing himself to Gurney. No way of keeping the revelation from Namri. And Namri was another problem.
    Sabiha entered the cell with a bowl in her hands. He admired the way the light from outside made rainbow circles at the edges of her hair. Gently she raised his head and began feeding him from the bowl. It was only then he realized how weak he was. He allowed her to feed him while his mind went roving, recalling the session with Gurney and Namri. They believed him! Namri more than Gurney, but even Gurney could not deny what his senses had already reported to him about the planet.
    Sabiha wiped his mouth with a hem of her robe.
    Ahhh, Sabiha, he thought, recalling that other vision which filled his heart with pain. Many nights have I dreamed beside the open water, hearing the winds pass overhead. Many nights my flesh lay beside the snake's den and I dreamed of Sabiha in the summer heat. I saw her storing spice-bread baked on red-hot sheets of plasteel. I saw the clear water in the qanat, gentle and shining, but a storm wind ran through my heart. She sips coffee and eats. Her teeth shine in the shadows. I see her braiding my water rings into her hair. The amber fragrance of her bosom strikes through to my innermost senses. She torments me and oppresses me by her very existence.
    The pressure of his multi-memories exploded the time-frozen englobement which he had tried to resist. He felt twining bodies, the sounds of sex, rhythms laced in every sensory impression: lips, breathing, moist breaths, tongues. Somewhere in his vision there were helix shapes, coal-colored, and he felt the beat of those shapes as they turned within him. A voice pleaded in his skull: "Please, please, please, please . . ." There was an adult beefswelling in his loins and he felt his mouth open, holding, clinging to the girder-shape of ecstasy. Then a sigh, a lingering groundswelling sweetness, a collapse.
    Oh, how sweet to let that come into existence! 
    "Sabiha," he whispered. "Oh, my Sabiha." 
    When her charge had clearly gone deeply into the trance after his food, Sabiha took the bowl and left, pausing at the doorway to speak to Namri. "He called my name again."
    "Go back and stay with him," Namri said. "I must find Halleck and discuss this with him."
    Sabiha deposited the bowl beside the doorway and returned to the cell. She sat on the edge of the cot, staring at Leto's shadowed face.
    Presently he opened his eyes and put a hand out, touching her cheek. He began to talk to her then, telling her about the vision in which she had lived.
    She covered his hand with her own as he spoke. How sweet he was . . . how very swee -- She sank onto the cot, cushioned by his hand, unconscious before he pulled the hand away. Leto sat up, feeling the depths of his weakness. The spice and its visions had drained him. He searched through his cells for every spare spark of energy, climbed from the cot without disturbing Sabiha. He had to go, but he knew he'd not get far. Slowly he sealed his stillsuit, drew the robe around him, slipped through the passage to the outer shaft. There were a few people about, busy at their own affairs. They knew him, but he was not their responsibility. Namri and Halleck would know what he was doing; Sabiha could not be far away.
    He found the kind of side passage he needed and walked boldly down it.
    Behind him Sabiha slept peacefully until Halleck roused her.
    She sat up, rubbed her eyes, saw the empty cot, saw her uncle standing behind Halleck, the anger on their faces.
    Namri answered the expression on her face: "Yes, he's gone."
    "How could you let him escape?" Halleck raged. "How is this possible?"
    "He was seen going toward the lower exit," Namri said, his voice oddly calm.
    Sabiha cowered in front of them, remembering. 
    "How?" Halleck demanded. 
    "I don't know. I don't know." 
    "It's night and he's weak," Namri said. "He won't get far." 
    Halleck whirled on him. "You want the boy to die!" 
    "It wouldn't displease me." 
    Again Halleck confronted Sabiha. "Tell me what happened." 
    "He touched my cheek. He kept talking about his vision . . . us together." She looked down at the empty cot. "He made me sleep. He put some magic on me."
    Halleck glanced at Namri. "Could he be hiding inside somewhere?"
    "Nowhere inside. He'd be found, seen. He was headed for the exit. He's out there." 
    "Magic," Sabiha muttered.
    "No magic," Namri said. "He hypnotized her. Almost did it to me, you remember? Said I was his friend." 
    "He's very weak," Halleck said.
    "Only in his body," Namri said. "He won't go far, though. I disabled the heel pumps of his stillsuit. He'll die with no water if we don't find him."
    Halleck almost turned and struck Namri, but held himself in rigid control. Jessica had warned him that Namri might have to kill the lad. Gods below! What a pass they'd come to, Atreides against Atreides. He said: "Is it possible he just wandered away in the spice trance?"
    "What difference does it make?" Namri asked. "If he escapes us he must die."
    "We'll start searching at first light," Halleck said. "Did he take a Fremkit?"
    "There're always a few beside the doorseal," Namri said. "He'd've been a fool not to take one. Somehow he has never struck me as a fool."
    "Then send a message to our friends," Halleck said. "Tell them what's happened."
    "No messages this night," Namri said. "There's a storm coming. The tribes have been tracking it for three days now. It'll be here by midnight. Already communication's blanked out. The satellites signed off this sector two hours ago."
    A deep sigh shook Halleck. The boy would die out there for sure if the sandblast storm caught him. It would eat the flesh from his bones and sliver the bones to fragments. The contrived false death would become real. He slapped a fist into an open palm. The storm could trap them in the sietch. They couldn't even mount a search. And storm static had already isolated the sietch.
    "Distrans," he said, thinking they might imprint a message onto a bat's voice and dispatch it with the alarm.
    Namri shook his head. "Bats won't fly in a storm. Come on, man. They're more sensitive than we are. They'll cower in the cliffs until it's past. Best to wait for the satellites to pick us up again. Then we can try to find his remains." 
    "Not if he took a Fremkit and hid in the sand," Sabiha said.
    Cursing under his breath, Halleck whirled away from them, strode out into the sietch.

= = = = = =

Peace demands solutions, but we never reach living solutions; we only work toward them. A fixed solution is, by definition, a dead solution. The trouble with peace is that it tends to punish mistakes instead of rewarding brilliance.
-The Words of My Father: an account of Muad'Dib reconstructed by Harq al-Ada

    "She's training him? She's training Farad'n?"
    Alia glared at Duncan Idaho with a deliberate mix of anger and incredulity. The Guild heighliner had swung into orbit around Arrakis at noon local. An hour later the lighter had put Idaho down at Arrakeen, unannounced, but all casual and open. Within minutes a 'thopter had deposited him atop the Keep. Warned of his impending arrival, Alia had greeted him there, coldly formal before her guards, but now they stood in her quarters beneath the north rim. He had just delivered his report, truthfully, precisely, emphasizing each datum in mentat fashion.
    "She has taken leave of her senses," Alia said.
    He treated the statement as a mentat problem. "All the indicators are that she remains well balanced, sane. I should say her sanity index was --" 
    "Stop that!" Alia snapped. "What can she be thinking of?" 
    Idaho, who knew that his own emotional balance depended now upon retreat into mentat coldness, said: "I compute she is thinking of her granddaughter's betrothal." His features remained carefully bland, a mask for the raging grief which threatened to engulf him. There was no Alia here. Alia was dead. For a time he'd maintained a myth-Alia before his senses, someone he'd manufactured out of his own needs, but a mentat could carry on such self-deception for only a limited time. This creature in human guise was possessed; a demon-psyche drove her. His steely eyes with their myriad facets available at will reproduced upon his vision centers a multiplicity of myth-Alias. But when he combined them into a single image, no Alia remained. Her features moved to other demands. She was a shell within which outrages had been committed.
    "Where's Ghanima?" he asked.
    She waved the question aside. "I've sent her with Irulan to stay in Stilgar's keeping."
    Neutral territory, he thought. There's been another negotiation with rebellious tribes. She's losing ground and doesn't know it . . . or does she? Is there another reason? Has Stilgar gone over to her?
    "The betrothal," Alia mused. "What are conditions in the Corrino House?"
    "Salusa swarms with outrine relatives, all working upon Farad'n, hoping for a share in his return to power." 
    "And she's training him in the Bene Gesserit . . ." 
    "Is it not fitting for Ghanima's husband?"
    Alia smiled to herself, thinking of Ghanima's adamant rage. Let Farad'n be trained. Jessica was training a corpse. It would all work out.
    "I must consider this at length," she said. "You're very quiet, Duncan." 
    "I await your questions."
    "I see. You know, I was very angry with you. Taking her to Farad'n!" 
    "You commanded me to make it real."
    "I was forced to put out the report that you'd both been taken captive," she said.
    "I obeyed your orders."
    "You're so literal at times, Duncan. You almost frighten me. But if you hadn't, well . . ."
    "The Lady Jessica's out of harm's way," he said. "And for Ghanima's sake we should be grateful that --"
    "Exceedingly grateful," she agreed. And she thought: He's no longer trustworthy. He has that damnable Atreides loyalty. I must make an excuse to send him away . . . and have him eliminated. An accident, of course. 
    She touched his cheek.
    Idaho forced himself to respond to the caress, taking her hand and kissing it.
    "Duncan, Duncan, how sad it is," she said. "But I cannot keep you here with me. Too much is happening and I've so few I can completely trust." 
    He released her hand, waited.
    "I was forced to send Ghanima to Tabr," she said. "Things are in deep unrest here. Raiders from the Broken Lands breached the qanats at Kagga Basin and spilled all of their waters into the sands. Arrakeen was on short rations. The Basin's alive with sandtrout yet, reaping the water harvest. They're being dealt with, of course, but we're spread very thin."
    He'd already noted how few amazons of Alia's guard were to be seen in the Keep. And he thought: The Maquis of the Inner Desert will keep on probing her defenses. Doesn't she know that?
    "Tabr is still neutral territory," she said. "Negotiations are continuing there right now. Javid's there with a delegation from the Priesthood. But I'd like you at Tabr to watch them, especially Irulan." 
    "She is Corrino," he agreed.
    But he saw in her eyes that she was rejecting him. How transparent this Alia-creature had become!
    She waved a hand. "Go now, Duncan, before I soften and keep you here beside me. I've missed you so . . ." 
    "And I've missed you," he said, allowing all of his grief to flow into his voice.
    She stared at him, startled by the sadness. Then: "For my sake, Duncan." And she thought: Too bad, Duncan. She said: "Zia will take you to Tabr. We need the 'thopter back here." 
    Her pet amazon, he thought: I must be careful of that one.
    "I understand," he said, once more taking her hand and kissing it. He stared at the dear flesh which once had been his Alia's. He could not bring himself to look at her face as he left. Someone else stared back at him from her eyes.
    As he mounted to the Keep's roof pad, Idaho probed a growing sense of unanswered questions. The meeting with Alia had been extremely trying for the mentat part of him which kept reading data signs. He waited beside the 'thopter with one of the Keep's amazons, stared grimly southward. Imagination took his gaze beyond the Shield Wall to Sietch Tabr. Why does Zia take me to Tabr? Returning a 'thopter is a menial task. What is the delay? Is Zia getting special instructions?
    Idaho glanced at the watchful guard, mounted to the pilot's position in the 'thopter. He leaned out, said: "Tell Alia I'll send the 'thopter back immediately with one of Stilgar's men." 
    Before the guard could protest he closed the door and started the 'thopter. He could see her standing there indecisively. Who could question Alia's consort? He had the 'thopter airborne before she could make up her mind what to do.
    Now, alone in the 'thopter, he allowed his grief to spend itself in great wracking sobs. Alia was gone. They had parted forever. Tears flowed from his Tleilaxu eyes and he whispered: "Let all the waters of Dune flow into the sand. They will not match my tears." 
    This was a non-mentat excess, though, and he recognized it as such, forcing himself to sober assessment of present necessities. The 'thopter demanded his attention. The reactions of flying brought him some relief, and he had himself once more in hand. 
    Ghanima with Stilgar again. And Irulan.
    Why had Zia been designated to accompany him? He made it a mentat problem and the answer chilled him. I was to have a fatal accident.

= = = = = =

This rocky shrine to the skull of a ruler grants no prayers. It has become the grave of lamentations. Only the wind hears the voice of this place. The cries of night creatures and the passing wonder of two moons, all say his day has ended. No more supplicants come. The visitors have gone from the feast. How bare the pathway down this mountain.
-Lines at the Shrine of an Atreides Duke, Anon.

    The thing had the deceptive appearance of simplicity to Leto: avoiding the vision, do that which has not been seen. He knew the trap in his thought, how the casual threads of a locked future twisted themselves together until they held you fast, but he had a new grip on those threads. Nowhere had he seen himself running from Jacurutu. The thread to Sabiha must be cut first.
    He crouched now in the last daylight at the eastern edge of the rock which protected Jacurutu. His Fremkit had produced energy tablets and food. He waited now for strength. To the west lay Lake Azrak, the gypsum plain where once there'd been open water in the days before the worm. Unseen to the east lay the Bene Sherk, a scattering of new settlements encroaching upon the open bled. To the south lay the Tanzerouft, the Land of Terror: thirty-eight hundred kilometers of wasteland broken only by patches of grass-locked dunes and windtraps to water them -- the work of the ecological transformation remaking the landscape of Arrakis. They were serviced by airborne teams and no one stayed for long.
    I will go south, he told himself. Gurney will expect me to do that. This was not the moment to do the completely unexpected.
    It would be dark soon and he could leave this temporary hiding place. He stared at the southern skyline. There was a whistling of dun sky along that horizon, rolling there like smoke, a burning line of undulant dust -- a storm. He watched the high center of the storm rising up out of the Great Flat like a questing worm. For a full minute he watched the center, saw that it did not move to the right or the left. The old Fremen saying leaped into his mind: When the center does not move, you are in its path.
    That storm changed matters.
    For a moment he stared back westward the direction of Tabr, feeling the deceptive grey-tan peace of the desert evening, seeing the white gypsum pan edged by wind-rounded pebbles, the desolate emptiness with its unreal surface of glaring white reflecting dust clouds. Nowhere in any vision had he seen himself surviving the grey serpent of a mother storm or buried too deeply in sand to survive. There was only that vision of rolling in wind . . . but that might come later.
    And a storm was out there, winding across many degrees of latitude, whipping its world into submission. It could be risked. There were old stories, always heard from a friend of a friend, that one could lock an exhausted worm on the surface by propping a Maker hook beneath one of its wide rings and, having immobilized it, ride out a storm in the leeward shadow. There was a line between audacity and abandoned recklessness which tempted him. That storm would not come before midnight at the earliest. There was time. How many threads could be cut here? All, including the final one?
    Gurney will expect me to go south, but not into a storm.
    He stared down to the south, seeking a pathway, saw the fluent ebony brushstroke of a deep gorge curving through Jacurutu's rock. He saw sand curls in the bowels of the gorge, chimera sand. It uttered its haughty runnels onto the plain as though it were water. The gritty taste of thirst whispered in his mouth as he shouldered his Fremkit and let himself down onto the path which led into the canyon. It was still light enough that he might be seen, but he knew he was gambling with time.
    As he reached the canyon's lip, the quick night of the central desert fell upon him. He was left with the parched glissando of moonglow to light his way toward the Tanzerouft. He felt his heartbeat quicken with all of the fears which his wealth of memories provided. He sensed that he might be going down into Huanui-naa, as Fremen fears labeled the greatest storms: the Earth's Deathstill. But whatever came, it would be visionless. Every step left farther behind him the spice-induced dhyana, that spreading awareness of his intuitive-creative nature with its unfolding to the motionless chain of causality. For every hundred steps he took now, there must be at least one step aside, beyond words and into communion with his newly grasped internal reality.
    One way or another, father, I'm coming to you. 
    There were birds invisible in the rocks around him, making themselves known by small sounds. Fremen-wise, he listened for their echoes to guide his way where he could not see. Often as he passed crannies he marked the baleful green of eyes, creatures crouched in hiding because they knew a storm approached.
    He emerged from the gorge onto the desert. Living sand moved and breathed beneath him, telling of deep actions and latent fumaroles. He looked back and up to the moon-touched lava caps on Jacurutu's buttes. The whole structure was metamorphic, mostly pressure-formed. Arrakis still had something to say in its own future. He planted his thumper to call a worm and, when it began beating against the sand, took his position to watch and listen. Unconsciously his right hand went to the Atreides hawk ring concealed in a knotted fold of his dishsasha. Gurney had found it, but had left it. What had he thought, seeing Paul's ring? 
    Father, expect me soon.
    The worm came from the south. It angled in to avoid the rocks, not as large a worm as he'd hoped, but that could not be remedied. He gauged its passage, planted his hooks, and went up the scaled side with a quick scrambling as it swept over the thumper in a swishing dust spray. The worm turned easily under the pressure of his hooks. The wind of its passage began to whip his robe. He bent his gaze on the southern stars, dim through dust, and pointed the worm that way.
    Right into the storm.
    As First Moon rose, Leto gauged the storm height and put off his estimate of its arrival. Not before daylight. It was spreading out, gathering more energy for a great leap. There'd be plenty of work for the ecological transformation teams. It was as though the planet fought them with a conscious fury out here, the fury increasing as the transformation took in more land.
    All night he pressed the worm southward, sensing the reserves of its energy in the movements transmitted through his feet. Occasionally he let the beast fall off to the west which it was forever trying to do, moved by the invisible boundaries of its territory or by a deep-seated awareness of the coming storm. Worms buried themselves to escape the sandblast winds, but this one would not sink beneath the desert while Maker hooks held any of its rings open.
    At midnight the worm was showing many signs of exhaustion. He moved back along its great ridges and worked the flail, allowing it to slow down but continuing to drive it southward.
    The storm arrived just after daybreak. First there was the beady stretched-out immobility of the desert dawn pressing dunes one into another. Next, the advancing dust caused him to seal his face flaps. In the thickening dust the desert became a dun picture without lines. Then sand needles began cutting his cheeks, stinging his lids. He felt the coarse grit on his tongue and knew the moment of decision had come. Should he risk the old stories by immobilizing the almost exhausted worm? He took only a heartbeat to discard this choice, worked his way back to the worm's tail, slacked off his hooks. Barely moving now, the worm began to burrow. But the excesses of the creature's heat-transfer system still churned up a cyclone oven behind him in the quickening storm. Fremen children learned the dangers of this position near the worm's tail with their earliest stories. Worms were oxygen factories; fire burned wildly in their passage, fed by the lavish exhalations from the chemical adaptations to friction within them.
    Sand began to whip around his feet. Leto loosed his hooks and leaped wide to avoid the furnace at the tail. Everything depended now on getting beneath the sand where the worm had loosened it.
    Grasping the static compaction tool in his left hand, he burrowed into a dune's slipface, knowing the worm was too tired to turn back and swallow him in its great white-orange mouth. As he burrowed with his left hand, his right hand worked the stilltent from his Fremkit and he readied it for inflation. It was all done in less than a minute: he had the tent into a hard-walled sand pocket on the lee face of a dune. He inflated the tent and crawled into it. Before sealing the sphincter, he reached out with the compaction tool, reversed its action. The slipface came sliding down over the tent. Only a few sand grains entered as he sealed the opening.
    Now he had to work even more quickly. No sandsnorkel would reach up there to keep him supplied with breathing air. This was a great storm, the kind few survived. It would cover this place with tons of sand. Only the tender bubble of the stilltent with its compacted outer shell would protect him.
    Leto stretched flat on his back, folded his hands over his breast and sent himself into a dormancy trance where his lungs would move only once an hour. In this he committed himself to the unknown. The storm would pass and, if it did not expose his fragile pocket, he might emerge . . . or he might enter the Madinat as-salam, the Abode of Peace. Whatever happened, he knew he had to break the threads, one by one, leaving him at last only the Golden Path. It was that, or he could not return to the caliphate of his father's heirs. No more would he live the lie of that Desposyni, that terrible caliphate, chanting to the demiurge of his father. No more would he keep silent when a priest mouthed offensive nonsense: "His crysknife will dissolve demons!"
    With this commitment, Leto's awareness slipped into the web of timeless dao.

= = = = = =

There exist obvious higher-order influences in any planetary system. This is often demonstrated by introducing terraform life onto newly discovered planets. In all such cases, the life in similar zones develops striking similarities of adaptive form. This form signifies much more than shape; it connotes a survival organization and a relationship of such organizations. The human quest for this interdependent order and our niche within it represents a profound necessity. The quest can, however, be perverted into a conservative grip on sameness. This has always proved deadly for the entire system.
-The Dune Catastrophe, After Harq al-Ada

    "My son didn't really see the future; he saw the process of creation and its relationship to the myths in which men sleep," Jessica said. She spoke swiftly but without appearing to rush the matter. She knew the hidden observers would find a way to interrupt as soon as they recognized what she was doing.
    Farad'n sat on the floor outlined in a shaft of afternoon sunlight which slanted through the window behind him. Jessica could just see the top of a tree in the courtyard garden when she glanced across from her position standing against the far wall. It was a new Farad'n she saw: more slender, more sinewy. The months of training had worked their inevitable magic on him. His eyes glittered when he stared at her.
    "He saw the shapes which existing forces would create unless they were diverted," Jessica said. "Rather than turn against his fellow men, he turned against himself. He refused to accept only that which comforted him because that was moral cowardice." Farad'n had learned to listen silently testing, probing, holding his questions until he had shaped them into a cutting edge. She had been talking about the Bene Gesserit view of molecular memory expressed as ritual and had, quite naturally, diverged to the Sisterhood's way of analyzing Paul Muad'Dib. Farad'n saw a shadow play in her words and actions, however, a projection of unconscious forms at variance with the surface intent of her statements.
    "Of all our observations, this is the most crucial," she'd said. "Life is a mask through which the universe expresses itself. We assume that all of humankind and its supportive life forms represent a natural community and that the fate of all life is at stake in the fate of the individual. Thus, when it comes to that ultimate self-examination, the amor fati, we stop playing god and revert to teaching. In the crunch, we select individuals and we set them as free as we're able."
    He saw now where she had to be going and knowing its effect upon those who watched through the spy eyes, refrained from casting an apprehensive glance at the door. Only a trained eye could have detected his momentary imbalance, but Jessica saw it and smiled. A smile, after all, could mean anything.
    "This is a sort of graduation ceremony," she said. "I'm very pleased with you, Farad'n. Will you stand, please." He obeyed, blocking off her view of the treetop through the window behind him.
    Jessica held her arms stiffly at her side, said: "I am charged to say this to you. 'I stand in the sacred human presence. As I do now, so should you stand someday. I pray to your presence that this be so. The future remains uncertain and so it should, for it is the canvas upon which we paint our desires. Thus always the human condition faces a beautifully empty canvas. We possess only this moment in which to dedicate ourselves continuously to the sacred presence which we share and create.' "
    As Jessica finished speaking, Tyekanik came through the door on her left, moving with a false casualness which the scowl on his face belied. "My Lord," he said. But it already was too late. Jessica's words and all of the preparation which had gone before had done their work. Farad'n no longer was Corrino. He was now Bene Gesserit.

= = = = = =

What you of the CHOAM directorate seem unable to understand is that you seldom find real loyalties in commerce. When did you last hear of a clerk giving his life for the company? Perhaps your deficiency rests in the false assumption that you can order men to think and cooperate. This has been a failure of everything from religions to general staffs throughout history. General staffs have a long record of destroying their own nations. As to religions, I recommend a rereading of Thomas Aquinas. As to you of CHOAM, what nonsense you believe! Men must want to do things out of their own innermost drives. People, not commercial organizations or chains of command, are what make great civilizations work. Every civilization depends upon the quality of the individuals it produces. If you over-organize humans, over-legalize them, suppress their urge to greatness -- they cannot work and their civilization collapses.
-A letter to CHOAM, Attributed to The Preacher

    Leto came out of the trance with a softness of transition which did not define one condition as separate from another. One level of awareness simply moved into the other.
    He knew where he was. A restoration of energy surged through him, but he sensed another message from the stale deadliness of the oxygen-depleted air within the stilltent. If he refused to move, he knew he would remain caught in the timeless web, the eternal now where all events coexisted. This prospect enticed him. He saw Time as a convention shaped by the collective mind of all sentience. Time and Space were categories imposed on the universe by his Mind. He had but to break free of the multiplicity where prescient visions lured him. Bold selection could change provisional futures. 
    What boldness did this moment require?
    The trance state lured him. Leto felt that he had come from the alam al-mythal into the universe of reality only to find them identical. He wanted to maintain the Rihani magic of this revelation, but survival demanded decisions of him. His relentless taste for life sent its signals along his nerves.
    Abruptly he reached out his right hand to where he had left the sand-compaction tool. He gripped it, rolled onto his stomach, and breached the tent's sphincter. A pool of sand drifted across his hand. Working in darkness, goaded by the stale air, he worked swiftly, tunneling upward at a steep angle. Six times his body lengths he went before he broke out into darkness and clean air. He slipped out onto the moonlight windface of a long curving dune, found himself about a third of the way from the dune's top.
    It was Second Moon above him. It moved swiftly across him, departing beyond the dune, and the stars were laid out above him like bright rocks beside a path. Leto searched for the constellation of The Wanderer, found it, and let his gaze follow the outstretched arm to the brilliant glittering of Foum al-Hout, the polar star of the south.
    There's your damned universe for you! he thought. Seen close up it was a hustling place like the sand all around him, a place of change, of uniqueness piled upon uniqueness. Seen from a distance, only the patterns lay revealed and those patterns tempted one to belief in absolutes.
    In absolutes, we may lose our way. This made him think of the familiar warning from a Fremen ditty: "Who loses his way in the Tanzerouft loses his life." The patterns could guide and they could trap. One had to remember that patterns change.
    He took a deep breath, stirred himself into action. Sliding back down his passage, he collapsed the tent, brought it out and repacked the Fremkit.
    A wine glow began to develop along the eastern horizon. He shouldered the pack, climbed to the dunecrest and stood there in the chill predawn air until the rising sun felt warm on his right cheek. He stained his eyepits then to reduce reflection, knowing that he must woo this desert now rather than fight her. When he had put the stain back into the pack he sipped from one of his catchtubes, drew in a sputtering of drops and then air.
    Dropping to the sand, he began going over his stillsuit, coming at last to the heel pumps. They had been cut cleverly with a needle knife. He slipped out of the suit and repaired it, but the damage had been done. At least half of his body's water was gone. Were it not for the stilltent's catch . . . He mused on this as he donned the suit, thinking how odd it was that he'd not anticipated this. Here was an obvious danger of visionless future.
    Leto squatted on the dunetop then, pressed himself against the loneliness of this place. He let his gaze wander, fishing in the sand for a whistling vent, any irregularity of the dunes which might indicate spice or worm activity. But the storm had stamped its uniformity upon the land. Presently he removed a thumper from the kit, armed it, and sent it rotating to call Shai-Hulud from his depths. He then moved off to wait.
    The worm was a long time coming. He heard it before he saw it, turned eastward where the earthshaking susurration made the air tremble, waited for the first glimpse of orange from the mouth rising out of the sand. The worm lifted itself from the depths in a gigantic hissing of dust which obscured its flanks. The curving grey wall swept past Leto and he planted his hooks, went up the side in easy steps. He turned the worm southward in a great curving track as he climbed.
    Under his goading hooks, the worm picked up speed. Wind whipped his robe against him. He felt himself to be goaded as the worm was goaded, an intense current of creation in his loins. Each planet has its own period and each life likewise, he reminded himself.
    The worm was a type Fremen called a "growler." It frequently dug in its foreplates while the tail was driving. This produced rumbling sounds and caused part of its body to rise clear of the sand in a moving hump. It was a fast worm, though, and when they picked up a following wind the furnace exhalation of his tail sent a hot breeze across him. It was filled with acrid odors carried on the freshet of oxygen.
    As the worm sped southward, Leto allowed his mind to run free. He tried to think of this passage as a new ceremony for his life, one which kept him from considering the price he'd have to pay for his Golden Path. Like the Fremen of old, he knew he'd have to adopt many new ceremonies to keep his personality from dividing into its memory parts, to keep the ravening hunters of his soul forever at bay. Contradictory images, never to be unified, must now be encysted in a living tension, a polarizing force which drove him from within.
    Always newness, he thought. I must always find the new threads out of my vision.
    In the early afternoon his attention was caught by a protuberance ahead and slightly to the right of his course. Slowly the protuberance became a narrow butte, an upthrust rock precisely where he'd expected it.
    Now Namri . . . Now Sabiha, let us see how your brethren take to my presence, he thought. This was a most delicate thread ahead of him, dangerous more for its lures than its open threats.
    The butte was a long time changing dimensions. And it appeared for a while that it approached him instead of him approaching it.
    The worm, tiring now, kept veering left. Leto slid down the immense slope to set his hooks anew and keep the giant on a straight course. A soft sharpness of melange came to his nostrils, the signal of a rich vein. They passed the leprous blotches of violet sand where a spiceblow had erupted and he held the worm firmly until they were well past the vein. The breeze, redolent with the gingery odor of cinnamon, pursued them for a time until Leto rolled the worm onto its new course, headed directly toward the rising butte.
    Abruptly colors blinked far out on the southern bled: the unwary rainbow flashing of a man-made artifact in that immensity. He brought up his binoculars, focused the oil lenses, and saw in the distance the outbanking wings of a spice-scout glittering in the sunlight. Beneath it a big harvester was shedding its wings like a chrysalis before lumbering off. When Leto lowered the binoculars the harvester dwindled to a speck, and he felt himself overcome by the hadhdhab, the immense omnipresence of the desert, it told him how those spice-hunters would see him, a dark object between desert and sky, which was the Fremen symbol for man. They'd see him, of course, and they'd be cautious. They'd wait. Fremen were always suspicious of one another in the desert until they recognized the newcomer or saw for certain that he posed no threat. Even within the fine patina of Imperial civilization and its sophisticated rules they remained half-tamed savages, aware always that a crysknife dissolved at the death of its owner.
    That's what can save us, Leto thought. That wildness.
    In the distance the spice-scout banked right, then left, a signal to the ground. He imagined the occupants scanning the desert behind him for sign that he might be more than a single rider on a single worm.
    Leto rolled the worm to the left, held it until it had reversed its course, dropped down the flank, and leaped clear. The worm, released from his goading, sulked on the surface for a few breaths, then sank its front third and lay there recuperating, a sure sign that it had been ridden too long.
    He turned away from the worm; it would stay there now. The scout was circling its crawler, still giving wing signals. They were smuggler-paid renegades for certain, wary of electronic communications. The hunters would be on spice out there. That was the message of the crawler's presence.
    The scout circled once more, dipped its wings, came out of the circle and headed directly toward him. He recognized it for a type of light 'thopter his grandfather had introduced on Arrakis. The craft circled once above him, went out along the dune where he stood, and banked to land against the breeze. It came down within ten meters of him, stirring up a scattering of dust. The door on his side cracked enough to emit a single figure in a heavy Fremen robe with a spear symbol at the right breast.
    The Fremen approached slowly, giving each of them time to study the other. The man was tall with the total indigo of spice-eyes. The stillsuit mask concealed the lower half of his face and the hood had been drawn down to protect his brows. The movement of the robe revealed a hand beneath it holding a maula pistol.
    The man stopped two paces from Leto, looked down at him with a puzzled crinkling around the eyes. 
    "Good fortune to us all," Leto said.
    The man peered all around, scanning the emptiness, then returned his attention to Leto. "What do you here, child?" he demanded. His voice was muffled by the stillsuit mask. "Are you trying to be the cork in a wormhole?"
    Again Leto used traditional Fremen formula: "The desert is my home." 
    "Wenn?" the man demanded. Which way do you go? 
    "I travel south from Jacurutu."
    An abrupt laugh erupted from the man. "Well, Batigh! You are the strangest thing I've ever seen in the Tanzerouft." 
    "I'm not your Little Melon," Leto said, responding to Batigh. That was a label with dire overtones. The Little Melon on the desert's edge offered its water to any finder.
    "We'll not drink you, Batigh," the man said. "I am Muriz. I am the arifa of this taif." He indicated with a head motion the distant spice-crawler.
    Leto noted how the man called himself the Judge of his group and referred to the others as taif, a band or company. They were not ichwan, not a band of brothers. Paid renegades for sure. Here lay the thread he required.
    When Leto remained silent, Muriz asked: "Do you have a name?"
    "Batigh will do."
    A chuckle shook Muriz. "You've not told me what you do here?"
    "I seek the footprints of a worm," Leto said, using the religious phrase which said he was on hajj for his own umma, his personal revelation.
    "One so young?" Muriz asked. He shook his head. "I don't know what to do with you. You have seen us."
    "What have I seen?" Leto asked. "I speak of Jacurutu and you make no response."
    "Riddle games," Muriz said. "What is that, then?" He nodded toward the distant butte.
    Leto spoke from his vision: "Only Shuloch." 
    Muriz stiffened and Leto felt his own pulse quicken.
    A long silence ensued and Leto could see the man debating and discarding various responses. Shuloch! In the quiet story time after a sietch meal, stories of the Shuloch caravanserie were often repeated. Listeners always assumed that Shuloch was a myth, a place for interesting things to happen and only for the sake of the story. Leto recalled a Shuloch story: A waif was found at the desert's edge and brought into the sietch. At first the waif refused to respond to his saviors, then when he spoke no one could understand his words. As days passed he continued unresponsive, refused to dress himself or cooperate in any way. Every time he was left alone he made odd motions with his hands. All the specialists in the sietch were called in to study this waif but arrived at no answer. Then a very old woman passed the doorway, saw the moving hands, and laughed. "He only imitates his father who rolls the spice-fibers into rope," she explained. "It's the way they still do it at Shuloch. He's just trying to feel less lonely." And the moral: "In the old ways of Shuloch there is security and a sense of belonging to the golden thread of life".
    As Muriz remained silent, Leto said: "I'm the waif from Shuloch who knows only to move his hands."
    In the quick movement of the man's head, Leto saw that Muriz knew the story. Muriz responded slowly, voice low and filled with menace. "Are you human?" 
    "Human as yourself," Leto said.
    "You speak most strangely for a child. I remind you that I am a judge who can respond to the taqwa."
    Ah, yes, Leto thought. In the mouth of such a judge, the taqwa carried immediate threat. Taqwa was the fear invoked by the presence of a demon, a very real belief among older Fremen. The arifa knew the ways to slay a demon and was always chosen "because he has the wisdom to be ruthless without being cruel, to know when kindness is in fact the way to greater cruelty." 
    But this thing had come to the point which Leto sought, and he said: "I can submit to the Mashhad."
    "I'll be the judge of any Spiritual Test," Muriz said. "Do you accept this?" 
    "Bi-lal kaifa," Leto said. Without qualification.
    A sly look came over Muriz's face. He said: "I don't know why I permit this. Best you were slain out of hand, but you're a small Batigh and I had a son who is dead. Come, we will go to Shuloch and I'll convene the Isnad for a decision about you." 
    Leto, noting how the man's every mannerism betrayed deadly decision, wondered how anyone could be fooled by this. He said: "I know Shuloch is the Ahl as-sunna wal-jamas."
    "What does a child know of the real world?" Muriz asked, motioning for Leto to precede him to the 'thopter.
    Leto obeyed, but listened carefully to the sound of the Fremen's footsteps. "The surest way to keep a secret is to make people believe they already know the answer," Leto said. "People don't ask questions then. It was clever of you who were cast out of Jacurutu. Who'd believe Shuloch, the story-myth place, is real? And how convenient for the smugglers or anyone else who desires access to Dune."
    Muriz's footsteps stopped. Leto turned with his back against the 'thopter's side, the wing on his left.
    Muriz stood half a pace away with his maula pistol drawn and pointed directly at Leto. "So you're not a child," Muriz said. "A cursed midget come to spy on us! I thought you spoke too wisely for a child, but you spoke too much too soon."
    "Not enough," Leto said. "I'm Leto, the child of Paul-Muad'Dib. If you slay me, you and your people will sink into the sand. If you spare me, I'll lead you to greatness."
    "Don't play games with me, midget," Muriz snarled. "Leto is at the real Jacurutu from whence you say . . ." He broke off. The gun hand dropped slightly as a puzzled frown made his eyes squint.
    It was the hesitation Leto had expected, He made every muscle indication of a move to the left which, deflecting his body no more than a millimeter, brought the Fremen's gun swinging wildly against the wing edge. The maula pistol flew from his hand and, before he could recover, Leto was beside him with Muriz's own crysknife pressed against the man's back.
    "The tip's poisoned," Leto said. "Tell your friend in the 'thopter that he's to remain exactly where he is without moving at all. Otherwise I'll be forced to kill you."
    Muriz, nursing his injured hand, shook his head at the figure in the 'thopter, said: "My companion Behaleth has heard you. He will be as unmoving as the rock."
    Knowing he had very little time until the two worked out a plan of action or their friends came to investigate, Leto spoke swiftly: "You need me, Muriz. Without me, the worms and their spice will vanish from Dune." He felt the Fremen stiffen.
    "But how do you know of Shuloch?" Muriz asked. "I know they said nothing at Jacurutu." 
    "So you admit I'm Leto Atreides?" 
    "Who else could you be? But how do you --" 
    "Because you are here," Leto said. "Shuloch exists, therefore the rest is utter simplicity. You are the Cast Out who escaped when Jacurutu was destroyed. I saw you signal with your wings, therefore you use no device which could be overheard at a distance. You collect spice, therefore you trade. You could only trade with the smugglers. You are a smuggler, yet you are Fremen. You must be of Shuloch." 
    "Why did you tempt me to slay you out of hand?" 
    "Because you would've slain me anyway when we'd returned to Shuloch." 
    A violent rigidity came over Muriz's body.
    "Careful, Muriz," Leto cautioned. "I know about you. It was in your history that you took the water of unwary travelers. By now this would be common ritual with you. How else could you silence the ones who chanced upon you? How else keep your secret? Batigh! You'd seduce me with gentle epithets and kindly words. Why waste any of my water upon the sand? And if I were missed as were many of the others -- well, the Tanzerouft got me." 
    Muriz made the Horns-of-the-Worm sign with his right hand to ward off the Rihani which Leto's words called up. And Leto, knowing how older Fremen distrusted mentats or anything which smacked of them by a show of extended logic, suppressed a smile.
    "Manri spoke of us at Jacurutu," Muriz said. "I will have his water when --"
    "You'll have nothing but empty sand if you continue playing the fool," Leto said. "What will you do, Muriz, when all of Dune has become green grass, trees, and open water?" 
    "It will never happen!" 
    "It is happening before your eves."
    Leto heard Muriz's teeth grinding in rage and frustration. Presently the man grated: "How would you prevent this?" 
    "I know the entire plan of the transformation," Leto said. "I know every weakness in it, every strength. Without me, Shai-Hulud will vanish forever."
    A sly note returning to his voice, Muriz asked: "Well, why dispute it here? We're at a standoff. You have your knife. You could kill me, but Behaleth would shoot you."
    "Not before I recovered your pistol," Leto said. "Then I'd have your 'thopter. Yes, I can fly it."
    A scowl creased Muriz's forehead beneath the hood. "What if you're not who you say?" 
    "Will my father not identify me?" Leto asked.
    "Ahhhh," Muriz said. "There's how you learned, eh? But . . ." He broke off, shook his head. "My own son guides him. He says you two have never . . . How could . . ." 
    "So you don't believe Muad'Dib reads the future," Leto said.
    "Of course we believe! But he says of himself that . . ." Again Muriz broke off.
    "And you thought him unaware of your distrust," Leto said. "I came to this exact place in this exact time to meet you, Muriz. I know all about you because I've seen you . . . and your son. I know how secure you believe yourselves, how you sneer at Muad'Dib, how you plot to save your little patch of desert. But your little patch of desert is doomed without me, Muriz. Lost forever. It has gone too far here on Dune. My father has almost run out of vision, and you can only turn to me." 
    "That blind . . ." Muriz stopped, swallowed.
    "He'll return soon from Arrakeen," Leto said, "and then we shall see how blind he is. How far have you gone from the old Fremen ways, Muriz?" 
    "What?"
    "He is Wadquiyas with you. Your people found him alone in the desert and brought him to Shuloch. What a rich discovery he was! Richer than a spice-vein. Wadquiyas! He has lived with you; his water mingled with your tribe's water. He's part of your Spirit River." Leto pressed the knife hard against Muriz's robe. "Careful, Muriz." Leto lifted his left hand, released the Fremen's face flap, dropped it.
    Knowing what Leto planned, Muriz said: "Where would you go if you killed us both?" 
    "Back to Jacurutu."
    Leto pressed the fleshy part of his own thumb against Muriz's mouth. "Bite and drink, Muriz. That or die." 
    Muriz hesitated, then bit viciously into Leto's flesh.
    Leto watched the man's throat, saw the swallowing convulsion, withdrew the knife and returned it.
    "Wadquiyas," Leto said. "I must offend the tribe before you can take my water." 
    Muriz nodded.
    "Your pistol is over there." Leto gestured with his chin. 
    "You trust me now?" Muriz asked. 
    "How else can I live with the Cast Out?"
    Again Leto saw the sly look in Muriz's eyes, but this time it was a measuring thing, a weighing of economics. The man turned away with an abruptness which told of secret decisions, recovered his maula pistol and returned to the wing step. "Come," he said. "We tarry too long in a worm's lair."

= = = = = =

The future of prescience cannot always be locked into the rules of the past. The threads of existence tangle according to many unknown laws. Prescient future insists on its own rules. It will not conform to the ordering of the Zensunni nor to the ordering of science. Prescience builds a relative integrity. It demands the work of this instant, always warning that you cannot weave every thread into the fabric of the past.
-Kalima: The Words of Muad'Dib, The Shuloch Commentary

    Muriz brought the ornithopter in over Shuloch with a practiced ease. Leto, seated beside him, felt the armed presence of Behaleth behind them. Everything went on trust now and the narrow thread of his vision to which he clung. If that failed, Allahu akbahr. Sometimes one had to submit to a greater order.
    The butte of Shuloch was impressive in this desert. Its unmarked presence here spoke of many bribes and many deaths, of many friends in high places. Leto could see at Shuloch's heart a cliff-walled pan with interfringing blind canyons leading down into it. A thick growth of shadescale and salt bushes lined the lower edges of these canyons with an inner ring of fan palms, indicating the water riches of this place. Crude buildings of greenbush and spice-fiber had been built out from the fan palms. The buildings were green buttons scattered on the sand. There would live the cast out of the Cast Out, those who could go no lower except into death.
    Muriz landed in the pan near the base of one of the canyons. A single structure stood on the sand directly ahead of the 'thopter: a thatch of desert vines and bejato leaves, all lined with heat-fused spice-fabric. It was the living replica of the first crude stilltents and it spoke of degradation for some who lived in Shuloch. Leto knew the place would leak moisture and would be full of night-biters from the nearby growth. So this was how his father lived. And poor Sabiha. Here would be her punishment.
    At Muriz's order Leto let himself out of the 'thopter, jumped down to the sand, and strode toward the hut. He could see many people working farther toward the canyon among the palms. They looked tattered, poor, and the fact that they barely glanced at him or at the 'thopter said much of the oppression here. Leto could see the rock lip of a qanat beyond the workers, and there was no mistaking the sense of moisture in this air: open water. Passing the hut, Leto saw it was as crude as he'd expected. He pressed on to the qanat, peered down and saw the swirl of predator fish in the dark flow. The workers, avoiding his eyes, went on with clearing sand away from the line of rock openings.
    Muriz came up behind Leto, said: "You stand on the boundary between fish and worm. Each of these canyons has its worm. This qanat has been opened and we will remove the fish presently to attract sandtrout."
    "Of course," Leto said. "Holding pens. You sell sandtrout and worms off-planet." 
    "It was Muad'Dib's suggestion!"
    "I know. But none of your worms or sandtrout survive for long away from Dune." 
    "Not yet," Muriz said. "But someday . . ." 
    "Not in ten thousand years," Leto said. And he turned to watch the turmoil on Muriz's face. Questions flowed there like the water in the qanat. Could this son of Muad'Dib really read the future? Some still believed Muad'Dib had done it, but . . . How could a thing such as this be judged?
    Presently Muriz turned away, led them back to the hut. He opened the crude doorseal, motioned for Leto to enter. There was a spice-oil lamp burning against the far wall and a small figure squatted beneath it, back to the door. The burning oil gave off a heavy fragrance of cinnamon.
    "They've sent down a new captive to care for Muad'Dib's sietch," Muriz sneered. "If she serves well, she may keep her water for a time. "He confronted Leto. "Some think it evil to take such water. Those lace-shirt Fremen now make rubbish heaps in their new towns! Rubbish heaps! When has Dune ever before seen rubbish heaps! When we get such as this one --" He gestured toward the figure by the lamp. "-- they're usually half wild with fear, lost to their own kind and never accepted by true Fremen. Do you understand me, Leto-Batigh?" 
    "I understand you." The crouching figure had not moved.
    "You speak of leading us," Muriz said. "Fremen are led by men who've been blooded. What could you lead us in?" 
    "Kralizec," Leto said, keeping his attention on the crouched figure.
    Muriz glared at him, brows contracted over his indigo eyes. Kralizec? That wasn't merely war or revolution; that was the Typhoon Struggle. It was a word from the furthermost Fremen legends: the battle at the end of the universe. Kralizec?
    The tall Fremen swallowed convulsively. This sprat was as unpredictable as a city dandy! Muriz turned to the squatting figure. "Woman! Liban wahid!" he commanded. Bring us the spicedrink!" 
    She hesitated. "Do as he says, Sabiha," Leto said.
    She jumped to her feet, whirling. She stared at him, unable to take her gaze from his face.
    "You know this one?" Muriz asked.
    "She is Namri's niece. She offended Jacurutu and they have sent her to you." 
    "Namri? But . . ." 
    "Liban wahid," Leto said.
    She rushed past them, tore herself through the doorseal and they heard the sound of her running feet.
    "She will not go far," Muriz said. He touched a finger to the side of his nose. "A kin of Namri, eh. Interesting. What did she do to offend?"
    "She allowed me to escape." Leto turned then and followed Sabiha. He found her standing at the edge of the qanat. Leto moved up beside her and looked down at the water. There were birds in the nearby fan palms and he heard their calls, their wings. The workers made scraping sounds as they moved sand. Still he did as Sabiha did, looking down, deep into the water and its reflections. The corners of his eyes saw blue parakeets in the palm fronds. One flew across the qanat and he saw it reflected in a silver swirl of fish, all run together as though birds and predators swam in the same firmament.
    Sabiha cleared her throat. 
    "You hate me," Leto said.
    "You shamed me. You shamed me before my people. They held an Isnad and sent me here to lose my water. All because of you!"
    Muriz laughed from close behind them. "And now you see, Leto-Batigh, that our Spirit River has many tributaries." 
    "But my water flows in your veins," Leto said, turning. "That is no tributary. Sabiha is the fate of my vision and I follow her. I fled across the desert to find my future here in Shuloch."
    "You and . . ." He pointed at Sabiha, threw his head back in laughter.
    "It will not be as either of you might believe," Leto said. "Remember this, Muriz. I have found the footprints of my worm." He felt tears swimming in his eyes then.
    "He gives water to the dead," Sabiha whispered.
    Even Muriz stared at him in awe. Fremen never cried unless it was the most profound gift of the soul. Almost embarrassed, Muriz closed his mouthseal, pulled his djeballa hood low over his brows.
    Leto peered beyond the man, said: "Here in Shuloch they still pray for dew at the desert's edge. Go, Muriz, and pray for Kralizec. I promise you it will come." 

= = = = = =

Fremen speech implies great concision, a precise sense of expression. It is immersed in the illusion of absolutes. Its assumptions are a fertile ground for absolutist religions. Furthermore, Fremen are fond of moralizing. They confront the terrifying instability of all things with institutionalized statements. They say: "We know there is no summa of all attainable knowledge; that is the preserve of God. But whatever men can learn, men can contain." Out of this knife-edged approach to the universe they carve a fantastic belief in signs and omens and in their own destiny. This is an origin of their Kralizec legend: the war at the end of the universe.
-Bene Gesserit Private Reports/folio 800881

    "They have him securely in a safe place," Namri said, smiling across the square stone room at Gurney Halleck. "You may report this to your friends."
    "Where is this safe place?" Halleck asked. He didn't like Namri's tone, felt constrained by Jessica's orders. Damn the witch! Her explanations made no sense except the warning about what could happen if Leto failed to master his terrible memories.
    "It's a safe place," Namri said. "That's all I'm permitted to tell you." 
    "How do you know this?" 
    "I've had a distrans. Sabiha is with him." 
    "Sabiha! She'll just let him --" 
    "Not this time." 
    "Are you going to kill him?" 
    "That's no longer up to me."
    Halleck grimaced. Distrans. What was the range of those damned cave bats? He'd often seen them flitting across the desert with hidden messages imprinted upon their squeaking calls. But how far would they go on this hellhole planet? 
    "I must see him for myself," Halleck said. 
    "That's not permitted."
    Halleck took a deep breath to quiet himself. He had spent two days and two nights waiting for search reports. Now it was another morning and he felt his role dissolving around him, leaving him naked. He had never liked command anyway. Command always waited while others did the interesting and dangerous things.
    "Why isn't it permitted?" he asked. The smugglers who'd arranged this safe-sietch had left too many questions unanswered and he wanted no more of the same from Namri.
    "Some believe you saw too much when you saw this sietch," Namri said.
    Halleck heard the menace, relaxed into the easy stance of the trained fighter, hand near but not on his knife. He longed for a shield, but that had been ruled out by its effect on the worms, its short life in the presence of storm-generated static charges. 
    "This secrecy isn't part of our agreement," Halleck said.
    "If I'd killed him, would that have been part of our agreement?"
    Again Halleck felt the jockeying of unseen forces about which the Lady Jessica hadn't warned him. This damned plan of hers! Maybe it was right not to trust the Bene Gesserit. Immediately, he felt disloyal. She'd explained the problem, and he'd come into her plan with the expectation that it, like all plans, would need adjustments later. This wasn't any Bene Gesserit; this was Jessica of the Atreides who'd never been other than friend and supporter to him. Without her, he knew he'd have been adrift in a universe more dangerous than the one he now inhabited. 
    "You can't answer my question," Namri said.
    "You were to kill him only if he showed himself to be . . . possessed," Halleck said. "Abomination." 
    Namri put his fist beside his right ear. "Your Lady knew we had tests for such. Wise of her to leave that judgment in my hands." 
    Halleck compressed his lips in frustration.
    "You heard the Reverend Mother's words to me," Namri said. "We Fremen understand such women but you off-worlders never understand them. Fremen women often send their sons to death."
    Halleck spoke past still lips. "Are you telling me you've killed him?"
    "He lives. He is in a safe place. He'll continue to receive the spice."
    "But I'm to escort him back to his grandmother if he survives," Halleck said.
    Namri merely shrugged.
    Halleck understood that this was all the answer he'd get. Damn! He couldn't go back to Jessica with such unanswered questions! He shook his head.
    "Why question what you cannot change?" Namri asked. "You're being well paid."
    Halleck scowled at the man. Fremen! They believed all foreigners were influenced primarily by money. But Namri was speaking more than Fremen prejudice. Other forces were at work here and that was obvious to one who'd been trained in observation by a Bene Gesserit. This whole thing had the smell of a feint within a feint within a feint . . .
    Shifting to the insultingly familiar form, Halleck said: "The Lady Jessica will be wrathful. She could send cohorts against --" 
    "Zanadiq!" Namri cursed. "You office messenger! You stand outside the Mohalata! I take pleasure in possessing your water for the Noble People!"
    Halleck rested a hand on his knife, readied his left sleeve where he'd prepared a small surprise for attackers. "I see no water spilled here," he said. "Perhaps you're blinded by your pride." 
    "You live because I wished you to learn before dying that your Lady Jessica will not send cohorts against anyone. You are not to be lured quietly into the Huanui, off-world scum. I am of the Noble People, and you --"
    "And I'm just a servant of the Atreides," Halleck said, voice mild. "We're the scum who lifted the Harkonnen yoke from your smelly neck."
    Namri showed white teeth in a grimace. "Your Lady is prisoner on Salusa Secundus. The notes you thought were from her came from her daughter!"
    By extreme effort, Halleck managed to keep his voice even. "No matter. Alia will . . ."
    Namri drew his crysknife. "What do you know of the Womb of Heaven? I am her servant, you male whore. I do her bidding when I take your water!" And he lunged across the room with foolhardy directness.
    Halleck, not allowing himself to be tricked by such seeming clumsiness, flicked up the left arm of his robe, releasing the extra length of heavy fabric he'd had sewn there, letting that take Namri's knife. In the same movement, Halleck swept the folds of cloth over Namri's head, came in under and through the cloth with his own knife aimed directly for the face. He felt the point bite home as Namri's body hit him with a hard surface of metal armor beneath the robe. The Fremen emitted one outraged squeal, jerked backward, and fell. He lay there, blood gushing from his mouth as his eyes glared at Halleck then slowly dulled.
    Halleck blew air through his lips. How could that fool Namri have expected anyone to miss the presence of armor beneath a robe? Halleck addressed the corpse as he recovered the trick sleeve, wiped his knife and sheathed it. "How did you think we Atreides servants were trained, fool?"
    He took a deep breath thinking: Well now. Whose feint am I? There'd been the ring of truth in Namri's words. Jessica a prisoner of the Corrinos and Alia working her own devious schemes. Jessica herself had warned of many contingencies with Alia as enemy, but had not predicted herself as prisoner. He had his orders to obey, though. First there was the necessity of getting away from this place. Luckily one robed Fremen looked much like another. He rolled Namri's body into a corner, threw cushions over it, moved a rug to cover the blood. When it was done, Halleck adjusted the nose and mouth tubes of his stillsuit, brought up the mask as one would in preparing for the desert, pulled the hood of his robe forward and went out into the long passage.
    The innocent move without care, he thought, setting his pace at an easy saunter. He felt curiously free, as though he'd moved out of danger, not into it.
    I never did like her plan for the boy, he thought. And I'll tell her so if I see her. If. Because if Namri spoke the truth, the most dangerous alternate plan went into effect. Alia wouldn't let him live long if she caught him, but there was always Stilgar -- a good Fremen with a good Fremen's superstitions.
    Jessica had explained it: "There's a very thin layer of civilized behavior over Stilgar's original nature. And here's how you take that layer off him . . ."

= = = = = =

The spirit of Muad'Dib is more than words, more than the letter of the Law which arises in his name. Muad'Dib must always be that inner outrage against the complacently powerful, against the charlatans and the dogmatic fanatics. It is that inner outrage which must have its say because Muad'Dib taught us one thing above all others: that humans can endure only in a fraternity of social justice.
-The Fedaykin Compact

    Leto sat with his back against the wall of the hut, his attention on Sabiha, watching the threads of his vision unroll. She had prepared the coffee and set it aside. Now she squatted across from him stirring his evening meal. It was a gruel redolent with melange. Her hands moved quickly with the ladle and liquid indigo stained the sides of his bowl. She bent her thin face over the bowl, blending in the concentrate. The crude membrane which made a stilltent of the hut had been patched with lighter material directly behind her, and this formed a grey halo against which her shadow danced in the flickering light of the cooking flame and the single lamp.
    That lamp intrigued Leto. These people of Shuloch were profligate with spice-oil: a lamp, not a glowglobe. They kept slave outcasts within their walls in the fashion told by the most ancient Fremen traditions. Yet they employed ornithopters and the latest spice harvesters. They were a crude mixture of ancient and modern.
    Sabiha pushed the bowl of gruel toward him, extinguished the cooking flame.
    Leto ignored the bowl.
    "I will be punished if you do not eat this," she said.
    He stared at her, thinking: If I kill her, that'll shatter one vision. If I tell her Muriz's plans, that'll shatter another vision. If I wait here for my father, this vision-thread will become a mighty rope.
    His mind sorted the threads. Some held a sweetness which haunted him. One future with Sabiha carried alluring reality within his prescient awareness. It threatened to block out all others until he followed it out to its ending agonies.
    "Why do you stare at me that way?" she asked. 
    Still he did not answer.
    She pushed the bowl closer to him.
    Leto tried to swallow in a dry throat. The impulse to kill Sabiha welled in him. He found himself trembling with it. How easy it would be to shatter one vision and let the wildness run free! 
    "Muriz commands this," she said, touching the bowls.
    Yes, Muriz commanded it. Superstition conquered everything. Muriz wanted a vision cast for him to read. He was an ancient savage asking the witch doctor to throw the ox bones and interpret their sprawl. Muriz had taken his captive's stillsuit "as a simple precaution." There'd been a sly jibe at Namri and Sabiha in that comment. Only fools let a prisoner escape.
    Muriz had a deep emotional problem, though: the Spirit River. The captive's water flowed in Muriz's veins. Muriz sought a sign that would permit him to hold a threat of death over Leto. 
    Like father, like son, Leto thought.
    "The spice will only give you visions," Sabiha said. The long silences made her uneasy. "I've had visions in the orgy many times. They don't mean anything."
    That's it! he thought, his body locking itself into a stillness which left his skin cold and clammy. The Bene Gesserit training took over his consciousness, a pinpoint illumination which fanned out beyond him to throw the blazoning light of vision upon Sabiha and all of her Cast Out fellows. The ancient Bene Gesserit learning was explicit:
    "Languages build up to reflect specializations in a way of life. Each specialization may be recognized by its words, by its assumptions and sentence structures. Look for stoppages. Specializations represent places where life is being stopped, where the movement is dammed up and frozen." He saw Sabiha then as a vision-maker in her own right, and every other human carried the same power. Yet she was disdainful of her spice-orgy visions. They caused disquiet and, therefore, must be put aside, forgotten deliberately. Her people prayed to Shai-Hulud because the worm dominated many of their visions. They prayed for dew at the desert's edge because moisture limited their lives. Yet they wallowed in spice wealth and lured sandtrout to open qanats. Sabiha fed him prescient visions with a casual callousness, yet within her words he saw the illuminated signals: she depended upon absolutes, sought finite limits, and all because she couldn't handle the rigors of terrible decisions which touched her own flesh. She clung to her one-eyed vision of the universe, englobing and time-freezing as it might be, because the alternatives terrified her.
    In contrast, Leto felt the pure movement of himself. He was a membrane collecting infinite dimensions and, because he saw those dimensions, he could make the terrible decisions. 
    As my father did.
    "You must eat this!" Sabiha said, her voice petulant.
    Leto saw the whole pattern of the visions now and knew the thread he must follow. My skin is not my own. He stood, pulling his robe around him. It felt strange against his flesh with no stillsuit protecting his body. His feet were bare upon the fused spice-fabric of the floor, feeling the sand tracked in there. 
    "What're you doing?" Sabiha demanded. 
    "The air is bad in here. I'm going outside."
    "You can't escape," she said. "Every canyon has its worm. If you go beyond the qanat, the worms will sense you by your moisture. These captive worms are very alert -- not like the ones in the desert at all. Besides --" how gloating her voice became! "-- you've no stillsuit."
    "Then why do you worry?" he asked, wondering if he might yet provoke a real reaction from her. 
    "Because you've not eaten." 
    "And you'll be punished." 
    "Yes!"
    "But I'm already saturated with spice," he said. "Every moment is a vision." He gestured with a bare foot at the bowl. "Pour that onto the sand. Who'll know?" 
    "They watch," she whispered.
    He shook his head, shedding her from his visions, feeling new freedom envelop him. No need to kill this poor pawn. She danced to other music, not even knowing the steps, believing that she might yet share the power which lured the hungry pirates of Shuloch and Jacurutu. Leto went to the doorseal, put a hand upon it.
    "When Muriz comes," she said, "he'll be very angry with --"
    "Muriz is a merchant of emptiness," Leto said. "My aunt has drained him." 
    She got to her feet. "I'm going out with you." 
    And he thought: She remembers how I escaped her. Now she feels the fragility of her hold upon me. Her visions stir within her. But she would not listen to those visions. She had but to reflect: How could he outwit a captive worm in its narrow canyon? How could he live in the Tanzerouft without stillsuit or Fremkit?
    "I must be alone to consult my visions," he said. "You'll remain here." 
    "Where will you go?" 
    "To the qanat." 
    "The sandtrout come out in swarms at night." 
    "They won't eat me."
    "Sometimes the worm comes down to just beyond the water," she said. "If you cross the qanat . . ." She broke off, trying to edge her words with menace.
    "How could I mount a worm without hooks?" he asked, wondering if she still could salvage some bit of her visions.
    "Will you eat when you return?" she asked, squatting once more by the bowl recovering the ladle and stirring the indigo broth.
    "Everything in its own time," he said, knowing she'd be unable to detect his delicate use of Voice, the way he insinuated his own desires into her decision-making.
    "Muriz will come and see if you've had a vision," she warned.
    "I will deal with Muriz in my own way," he said, noting how heavy and slow her movements had become. The pattern of all Fremen lent itself naturally into the way he guided her now. Fremen were people of extraordinary energy at sunrise but a deep and lethargic melancholy often overcame them at nightfall. Already she wanted to sink into sleep and dreams. 
    Leto let himself out into the night alone.
    The sky glittered with stars and he could make out the bulk of surrounding butte against their pattern. He went up under the palms to the qanat.
    For a long time Leto squatted at the qanat's edge, listening to the restless hiss of sand within the canyon beyond. A small worm by the sound of it; chosen for that reason, no doubt. A small worm would be easier to transport. He thought about the worm's capture: the hunters would dull it with a water mist, using the traditional Fremen method of taking a worm for the orgy/transformation rite. But this worm would not be killed by immersion. This one would go out on a Guild heighliner to some hopeful buyer whose desert probably would be too moist. Few off-worlders realized the basic desiccation which the sandtrout had maintained on Arrakis. Had maintained. Because even here in the Tanzerouft there would be many times more airborne moisture than any worm had ever before known short of its death in a Fremen cistern.
    He heard Sabiha stirring in the hut behind him. She was restless, prodded by her own suppressed visions. He wondered how it would be to live outside a vision with her, sharing each moment just as it came, of itself. The thought attracted him far more strongly than had any spice vision. There was a certain cleanliness about facing an unknown future.
    "A kiss in the sietch is worth two in the city." 
    The old Fremen maxim said it all. The traditional sietch had held a recognizable wildness mingled with shyness. There were traces of that shyness in the people of Jacurutu/Shuloch, but only traces. This saddened him by revealing what had been lost.
    Slowly, so slowly that the knowledge was fully upon him before he recognized its beginnings, Leto grew aware of the soft rustling of many creatures all around him. 
    Sandtrout.
    Soon it would be time to shift from one vision to another. He felt the movement of sandtrout as a movement within himself. Fremen had lived with the strange creatures for generations, knowing that if you risked a bit of water as bait, you could lure them into reach. Many a Fremen dying of thirst had risked his last few drops of water in this gamble, knowing that the sweet green syrup teased from a sandtrout might yield a small profit in energy. But the sandtrout were mostly the game of children who caught them for the Huanui. And for play.
    Leto shuddered at the thought of what that play meant to him now.
    He felt one of the creatures slither across his bare foot. It hesitated, then went on, attracted by the greater amount of water in the qanat.
    For a moment, though, he'd felt the reality of his terrible decision. The sandtrout glove. It was the play of children. If one held a sandtrout in the hand, smoothing it over your skin, it formed a living glove. Traces of blood in the skin's capillaries could be sensed by the creatures, but something mingled with the blood's water repelled them. Sooner or later, the glove would slip off into the sand, there to be lifted into a spice-fiber basket. The spice soothed them until they were dumped into the deathstill.
    He could hear sandtrout dropping into the qanat, the swirl of predators eating them. Water softened the sandtrout, made it pliable. Children learned this early. A bit of saliva teased out the sweet syrup. Leto listened to the splashing. This was a migration of sandtrout come up to the open water, but they could not contain a flowing qanat patrolled by predator fish. 
    Still they came; still they splashed.
    Leto groped on the sand with his right hand until his fingers encountered the leathery skin of a sandtrout. It was the large one he had expected. The creature didn't try to evade him, but moved eagerly onto his flesh. He explored its outline with his free hand -- roughly diamond-shaped. It had no head, no extremities, no eyes, yet it could find water unerringly. With its fellows it could join body to body, locking one on another by the coarse interlacings of extruded cilia until the whole became one large sack-organism enclosing the water, walling off the "poison" from the giant which the sandtrout would become: Shai-Hulud.
    The sandtrout squirmed on his hand, elongating, stretching. As it moved, he felt a counterpart elongating and stretching of the vision he had chosen. This thread, not that one. He felt the sandtrout becoming thin, covering more and more of his hand. No sandtrout had ever before encountered a hand such as this one, every cell supersaturated with spice. No other human had ever before lived and reasoned in such a condition. Delicately Leto adjusted his enzyme balance, drawing on the illuminated sureness he'd gained in spice trance. The knowledge from those uncounted lifetimes which blended themselves within him provided the certainty through which he chose the precise adjustments, slaving off the death from an overdose which would engulf him if he relaxed his watchfulness for only a heartbeat. And at the same time he blended himself with the sandtrout, feeding on it, feeding it, learning it. His trance vision provided the template and he followed it precisely.
    Leto felt the sandtrout grow thin, spreading itself over more and more of his hand, reaching up his arm. He located another, placed it over the first one. Contact ignited a frenzied squirming in the creatures. Their cilia locked and they became a single membrane which enclosed him to the elbow. The sandtrout adjusted to the living glove of childhood play, but thinner and more sensitive as he lured it into the role of a skin symbiote. He reached down with the living glove, felt sand, each grain distinct to his senses. This was no longer sandtrout; it was tougher, stronger. And it would grow stronger and stronger . . . His groping hand encountered another sandtrout which whipped itself into union with the first two and adapted itself to the new role. Leathery softness insinuated itself up his arm to his shoulder.
    With a terrible singleness of concentration he achieved the union of his new skin with his body, preventing rejection. No corner of his attention was left to dwell upon the terrifying consequences of what he did here. Only the necessities of his trance vision mattered. Only the Golden Path could come from this ordeal.
    Leto shed his robe and lay naked upon the sand, his gloved arm outstretched into the path of migrating sandtrout. He remembered that once he and Ghanima had caught a sandtrout, abraded it against the sand until it contracted into the child-worm, a stiff tube, its interior pregnant with the green syrup. One bit gently upon the end and sucked swiftly before the wound was healed, gaining the few drops of sweetness.
    They were all over his body now. He could feel the pulse of his blood against the living membrane. One tried to cover his face, but he moved it roughly until it elongated into a thin roll. The thing grew much longer than the child-worm, remaining flexible. Leto bit the end of it, tasted a thin stream of sweetness which continued far longer than any Fremen had ever before experienced. He could feel energy from the sweetness flow through him. A curious excitement suffused his body. He was kept busy for a time rolling the membrane away from his face until he'd built up a stiff ridge circling from jaw to forehead and leaving his ears exposed. 
    Now the vision must be tested.
    He got to his feet, turned to run back toward the hut and, as he moved, found his feet moving too fast for him to balance. He plunged into the sand, rolled and leaped to his feet. The leap took him two meters off the sand and, when he fell back, trying to walk, he again moved too fast.
    Stop! he commanded himself. He fell into the prana-bindu forced relaxation, gathering his senses into the pool of consciousness. This focused the inward ripples of the constant-now through which he experienced Time, and he allowed the vision-elation to warm him. The membrane worked precisely as the vision had predicted.
    My skin is not my own.
    But his muscles took some training to live with this amplified movement. When he walked, he fell, rolling. Presently he sat. In the quiet, the ridge below his jaw tried to become a membrane covering his mouth. He spat against it and bit, tasting the sweet syrup. It rolled downward to the pressure of his hand.
    Enough time had passed to form the union with his body. Leto stretched flat and turned onto his face. He began to crawl, rasping the membrane against the sand. He could feel the sand distinctly, but nothing abraded his own flesh. With only a few swimming movements he traversed fifty meters of sand. The physical reaction was a friction-induced warming sensation.
    The membrane no longer tried to cover his nose and mouth, but now he faced the second major step onto his Golden Path. His exertions had taken him beyond the qanat into the canyon where the trapped worm stayed. He heard it hissing toward him, attracted by his movements.
    Leto leaped to his feet, intending to stand and wait, but the amplified movement sent him sprawling twenty meters farther into the canyon. Controlling his reactions with terrible effort, he sat back onto his haunches, straightened. Now the sand began to swell directly in front of him, rising up in a monstrous starlit curve. Sand opened only two body lengths from him. Crystal teeth flashed in the dim light. He saw the yawning mouth-cavern with, far back, the ambient movement of dim flame. The overpowering redolence of the spice swept over him. But the worm had stopped. It remained in front of him as First Moon lifted over the butte. The light reflected off the worm's teeth outlining the faery glow of chemical fires deep within the creature.
    So deep was the inbred Fremen fear that Leto found himself torn by a desire to flee. But his vision held him motionless, fascinated by this prolonged moment. No one had ever before stood this close to the mouth of a living worm and survived. Gently Leto moved his right foot, met a sand ridge and, reacting too quickly, was propelled toward the worm's mouth. He came to a stop on his knees.
    Still the worm did not move.
    It sensed only the sandtrout and would not attack the deep-sand vector of its own kind. The worm would attack another worm in its territory and would come to exposed spice. Only a water barrier stopped it -- and sandtrout, encapsulating water, were a water barrier.
    Experimentally, Leto moved a hand toward that awesome mouth. The worm drew back a full meter.
    Confidence restored, Leto turned away from the worm and began teaching his muscles to live with their new power. Cautiously he walked back toward the qanat. The worm remained motionless behind him. When Leto was beyond the water barrier he leaped with joy, went sailing ten meters across the sand, sprawled, rolled, laughed.
    Light flared on the sand as the hut's doorseal was breached. Sabiha stood outlined in the yellow and purple glow of the lamp, staring out at him.
    Laughing, Leto ran back across the qanat, stopped in front of the worm, turned and faced her with his arms outstretched. 
    "Look!" he called. "The worm does my bidding!" 
    As she stood in frozen shock, he whirled, went racing around the worm and into the canyon. Gaining experience with his new skin, he found he could run with only the lightest flexing of muscles. It was almost effortless. When he put effort into running, he raced over the sand with the wind burning the exposed circle of his face. At the canyon's dead end instead of stopping, he leaped up a full fifteen meters, clawed at the cliff, scrabbled, climbing like an insect, and came out on the crest above the Tanzerouft.
    The desert stretched before him, a vast silvery undulance in the moonlight.
    Leto's manic exhilaration receded.
    He squatted, sensing how light his body felt. Exertion had produced a slick film of perspiration which a stillsuit would have absorbed and routed into the transfer tissue which removed the salts. Even as he relaxed, the film disappeared now, absorbed by the membrane faster than a stillsuit could have done it. Thoughtfully Leto rolled a length of the membrane beneath his lips, pulled it into his mouth, and drank the sweetness.
    His mouth was not masked, though. Fremen-wise, he sensed his body's moisture being wasted with every breath. Leto brought a section of the membrane over his mouth, rolled it back when it tried to seal his nostrils, kept at this until the rolled barrier remained in place. In the desert way, he fell into the automatic breathing pattern: in through his nose, out through his mouth. The membrane over his mouth protruded in a small bubble, but remained in place. No moisture collected on his lips and his nostrils remained open. The adaptation proceeded, then.
    A 'thopter flew between Leto and the moon, banked, and came in for a spread-wing landing on the butte perhaps a hundred meters to his left. Leto glanced at it, turned, and looked back the way he had come up the canyon. Many lights could be seen down there beyond the qanat, a stirring of a multitude. He heard faint outcries, sensed hysteria in the sounds. Two men approached him from the 'thopter. Moonlight glinted on their weapons.
    The Mashhad, Leto thought, and it was a sad thought. Here was the great leap onto the Golden Path. He had put on the living, self-repairing stillsuit of a sandtrout membrane, a thing of unmeasurable value on Arrakis . . . until you understood the price. I am no longer human. The legends about this night will grow and magnify it beyond anything recognizable by the participants. But it will become truth, that legend.
    He peered down from the butte, estimated the desert floor lay two hundred meters below. The moon picked out ledges and cracks on the steep face but no connecting pathway. Leto stood, inhaled a deep breath, glanced back at the approaching men, then stepped to the cliff's edge and launched himself into space. Some thirty meters down his flexed legs encountered a narrow ledge. Amplified muscles absorbed the shock and rebounded in a leap sideways to another ledge, where he caught a narrow outcropping with his hands, dropped twenty meters, leaped to another handhold and once more went down, bouncing, leaping, grasping tiny ledges. He took the final forty meters in one jump, landing in a bent-knee roll which sent him plunging down the slip-face of a dune in a shower of sand and dust. At the bottom he scrambled to his feet, launched himself to the next dunecrest in one jump. He could hear hoarse shouts from atop the cliff but ignored them to concentrate on the leaping strides from dunetop to dunetop.
    As he grew more accustomed to amplified muscles he found a sensuous joy that he had not anticipated in this distance-gulping movement. It was a ballet on the desert, defiance of the Tanzerouft which no other had ever experienced.
    When he judged that the ornithopter's occupants had overcome their shock enough to mount pursuit once more, he dove for the moon-shadowed face of a dune, burrowed into it. The sand was like heavy liquid to his new strength, but the temperature mounted dangerously when he moved too fast. He broke free on the far face of the dune, found that the membrane had covered his nostrils. He removed it, sensed the new skin pulsing over his body in its labor to absorb his perspiration.
    Leto fashioned a tube at his mouth, drank the syrup while he peered upward at the starry sky. He estimated he had come fifteen kilometers from Shuloch. Presently a 'thopter drew its pattern across the stars, a great bird shape followed by another and another. He heard the soft swishing of their wings, the whisper of their muted jets.
    Sipping at the living tube, he waited. First Moon passed through its track, then Second Moon.
    An hour before dawn Leto crept out and up to the dunecrest, examined the sky. No hunters. Now he knew himself to be embarked upon a path of no return. Ahead lay the trap in Time and Space which had been prepared as an unforgettable lesson for himself and all of mankind.
    Leto turned northeast and loped another fifty kilometers before burrowing into the sand for the day, leaving only a tiny hole to the surface which he kept open with a sandtrout tube. The membrane was learning how to live with him as he learned how to live with it. He tried not to think of the other things it was doing to his flesh.
    Tomorrow I'll raid Gara Rulen, he thought. I'll smash their qanat and loose its water into the sand. Then I'll go on to Windsack, Old Gap, and Harg. In a month the ecological transformation will have been set back a full generation. That'll give us space to develop the new timetable.
    And the wildness of the rebel tribes would be blamed, of course. Some would revive memories of Jacurutu. Alia would have her hands full. As for Ghanima . . . Silently to himself, Leto mouthed the words which would restore her memory. Time for that later . . . if they survived this terrible mixing of threads.
    The Golden Path lured him out there on the desert, almost a physical thing which he could see with his open eyes. And he thought how it was: as animals must move across the land, their existence dependent upon that movement the soul of humankind, blocked for eons, needed a track upon which it could move.
    He thought of his father then, telling himself: "Soon we'll dispute as man to man, and only one vision will emerge."

= = = = = =

Limits of survival are set by climate, those long drifts of change which a generation may fail to notice. And it is the extremes of climate which set the pattern. Lonely, finite humans may observe climatic provinces, fluctuations of annual weather and, occasionally may observe such things as "This is a colder year than I've ever known. " Such things are sensible. But humans are seldom alerted to the shifting average through a great span of years. And it is precisely in this alerting that humans learn how to survive on any planet. They must learn climate.
-Arrakis, the Transformation, After Harq al-Ada

    Alia sat cross-legged on her bed, trying to compose herself by reciting the Litany Against Fear, but chuckling derision echoed in her skull to block every effort. She could hear the voice; it controlled her ears, her mind.
    "What nonsense is this? What have you to fear?" 
    The muscles of her calves twitched as her feet tried to make running motions. There was nowhere to run.
    She wore only a golden gown of the sheerest Palian silk and it revealed the plumpness which had begun to bulge her body. The Hour of Assassins had just passed; dawn was near. Reports covering the past three months lay before her on the red coverlet. She could hear the humming of the air conditioner and a small breeze stirred the labels on the shigawire spools.
    Aides had awakened her fearfully two hours earlier, bringing news of the latest outrage, and Alia had called for the report spools, seeking an intelligible pattern. 
    She gave up on the Litany.
    These attacks had to be the work of rebels. Obviously. More and more of them turned against Muad'Dib's religion.
    "And what's wrong with that?" the derisive voice asked within her.
    Alia shook her head savagely. Namri had failed her. She'd been a fool to trust such a dangerous double instrument. Her aides whispered that Stilgar was to blame, that he was a secret rebel. And what had become of Halleck? Gone to ground among his smuggler friends? Possibly.
    She picked up one of the report spools. And Muriz! The man was hysterical. That was the only possible explanation. Otherwise she'd have to believe in miracles. No human, let alone a child (even a child such as Leto) could leap from the butte at Shuloch and survive to flee across the desert in leaps that took him from dunecrest to dunecrest.
    Alia felt the coldness of the shigawire under her hand.
    Where was Leto, then? Ghanima refused to believe him other than dead. A Truthsayer had confirmed her story: Leto slain by a Laza tiger. Then who was the child reported by Namri and Muriz? 
    She shuddered.
    Forty qanats had been breached, their waters loosed into the sand. The loyal Fremen and even the rebels, superstitious louts, all! Her reports were flooded with stories of mysterious occurrences. Sandtrout leaped into qanats and shattered to become hosts of small replicas. Worms deliberately drowned themselves. Blood dripped from Second Moon and fell to Arrakis, where it stirred up great storms. And the storm frequency was increasing!
    She thought of Duncan incommunicado at Tabr, fretting under the restraints she'd exacted from Stilgar. He and Irulan talked of little else than the real meaning behind these omens. Fools! Even her spies betrayed the influence of these outrageous stories! 
    Why did Ghanima insist on her story of the Laza tiger?
    Alia sighed. Only one of the reports on the shigawire spools reassured her. Farad'n had sent a contingent of his household guard "to help you in troubles and to prepare the way for the Official Rite of Betrothal." Alia smiled to herself and shared the chuckle which rumbled in her skull. That plan, at least, remained intact. Logical explanations would be found to dispel all of this other superstitious nonsense.
    Meanwhile she'd use Farad'n's men to help close down Shuloch and to arrest the known dissidents, especially among the Naibs. She debated moving against Stilgar, but the inner voice cautioned against this. 
    "Not yet."
    "My mother and the Sisterhood still have some plan of their own," Alia whispered. "Why is she training Farad'n?" 
    "Perhaps he excites her," the Old Baron said. 
    "Not that cold one." 
    "You're not thinking of asking Farad'n to return her?"
    "I know the dangers in that!"
    "Good. Meanwhile, that young aide Zia recently brought in. I believe his name's Agarves -- Buer Agarves. If you'd invite him here tonight . . ." 
    "No!" 
    "Alia . . ."
    "It's almost dawn, you insatiable old fool! There's a Military Council meeting this morning, the Priests will have --" 
    "Don't trust them, darling Alia." 
    "Of course not!" 
    "Very well. Now, this Buer Agarves . . ." 
    "I said no!"
    The Old Baron remained silent within her, but she began to feel a headache. A slow pain crept upward from her left cheek into her skull. Once he'd sent her raging down the corridors with this trick. Now, she resolved to resist him.
    "If you persist, I'll take a sedative," she said. 
    He could see she meant it. The headache began to recede. 
    "Very well." Petulant. "Another time, then." 
    "Another time," she agreed.

= = = = = =

Thou didst divide the sand by thy strength; Thou breakest the heads of the dragons in the desert. Yea, I behold thee as a beast coming up from the dunes; thou hast the two horns of the lamb, but thou speakest as the dragon.
-Revised Orange Catholic Bible Arran 11:4

    It was the immutable prophecy, the threads become rope, a thing Leto now seemed to have known all of his life. He looked out across the evening shadows on the Tanzerouft. One hundred and seventy kilometers due north lay Old Gap, the deep and twisting crevasse through the Shield Wall by which the first Fremen had migrated into the desert.
    No doubts remained in Leto. He knew why he stood here alone in the desert, yet filled with a sense that he owned this entire land, that it must do his bidding. He felt the chord which connected him with all of humankind and that profound need for a universe of experiences which made logical sense, a universe of recognizable regularities within its perpetual changes. 
    I know this universe.
    The worm which had brought him here had come to the stamping of his foot and, rising up in front of him, had stopped like an obedient beast. He'd leaped atop it and, with only his membrane-amplified hands, had exposed the leading lip of the worm's rings to keep it on the surface. The worm had exhausted itself in the nightlong dash northward. Its silicon-sulfur internal "factory" had worked at capacity, exhaling lavish gusts of oxygen which a following wind had sent in enveloping eddies around Leto. At times the warm gusts had made him dizzy, filled his mind with strange perceptions. The reflexive and circular subjectivity of his visions had turned inward upon his ancestry, forcing him to relive portions of his Terranic past, then comparing those portions with his changing self.
    Already he could feel how far he'd drifted from something recognizably human. Seduced by the spice which he gulped from every trace he found, the membrane which covered him no longer was sandtrout, just as he was no longer human. Cilia had crept into his flesh, forming a new creature which would seek its own metamorphosis in the eons ahead.
    You saw this, father, and rejected it, he thought. It was a thing too terrible to face.
    Leto knew what was believed of his father, and why. 
    Muad'Dib died of prescience.
    But Paul Atreides had passed from the universe of reality into the alam al-mythal while still alive, fleeing from this thing which his son had dared.
    Now there was only The Preacher.
    Leto squatted on the sand and kept his attention northward. The worm would come from that direction, and on its back would ride two people: a young Fremen and a blind man.
    A flight of pallid bats passed over Leto's head, bending their course southeast. They were random specks in the darkening sky, and a knowledgeable Fremen eye could mark their back-course to learn where shelter lay that way. The Preacher would avoid that shelter, though. His destination was Shuloch, where no wild bats were permitted lest they guide strangers to a secret place.
    The worm appeared first as a dark movement between the desert and the northern sky. Matar, the rain of sand dropped from high altitudes by a dying stormwind, obscured the view for a few minutes, then it returned clearer and closer.
    The cold-line at the base of the dune where Leto crouched began to produce its nightly moisture. He tasted the fragile dampness in his nostrils, adjusted the bubble cap of the membrane over his mouth. There no longer was any need for him to find soaks and sip-wells. From his mother's genes he had that longer, larger Fremen large intestine to take back water from everything which came its way. The living stillsuit grasped and retained every bit of moisture it encountered. And even while he sat here the membrane which touched sand extruded pseudopod-cilia to hunt for bits of energy which it could store.
    Leto studied the approaching worm. He knew the youthful guide had seen him by this time, noting the spot atop the dune. The worm rider would discern no principle in this object seen from a distance, but that was a problem Fremen had learned how to handle. Any unknown object was dangerous. The young guide's reactions would be quite predictable, even without the vision.
    True to that prediction, the worm's course shifted slightly and aimed directly at Leto. Giant worms were a weapon which Fremen had employed many times. Worms had helped beat Shaddam at Arrakeen. This worm, however, failed to do its rider's bidding. It came to a halt ten meters away and no manner of goading would send it across another grain of sand.
    Leto arose, feeling the cilia snap back into the membrane behind him. He freed his mouth and called out: "Achlan, wasachlan!" Welcome, twice welcome!
    The blind man stood behind his guide atop the worm, one hand on the youth's shoulder. The man held his face high, nose pointed over Leto's head as though trying to sniff out this interruption. Sunset painted orange on his forehead.
    "Who is that?" the blind man asked, shaking his guide's shoulder. "Why have we stopped?" His voice was nasal through the stillsuit plugs.
    The youth stared fearfully down at Leto, said: "It is only someone alone in the desert. A child by his looks. I tried to send the worm over him, but the worm won't go." 
    "Why didn't you say?" the blind man demanded.
    "I thought it was only someone alone in the desert!" the youth protested. "But it's a demon."
    "Spoken like a true son of Jacurutu," Leto said. "And you, sire, you are The Preacher."
    "I am that one, yes." And there was fear in The Preacher's voice because, at last, he had met his own past.
    "This is no garden," Leto said, "but you are welcome to share this place with me tonight."
    "Who are you?" The Preacher demanded. "How have you stopped our worm?" There was an ominous tone of recognition in The Preacher's voice. Now he called up the memories of this alternate vision . . . knowing he could reach an end here.
    "It's a demon!" the young guide protested. "We must flee this place or our souls --" 
    "Silence!" The Preacher roared.
    "I am Leto Atreides," Leto said. "Your worm stopped because I commanded it."
    The Preacher stood in frozen silence.
    "Come, father," Leto said. "Alight and spend the night with me. I'll give you sweet syrup to sip. I see you've Fremkits with food and water jars. We'll share our riches here upon the sand." 
    "Leto's yet a child," The Preacher protested. "And they say he's dead of Corrino treachery. There's no childhood in your voice."
    "You know me, sire," Leto said. "I'm small for my age as you were, but my experience is ancient and my voice has learned." 
    "What do you here in the Inner Desert?" The Preacher asked.
    "Bu ji," Leto said. Nothing from nothing. It was the answer of a Zensunni wanderer, one who acted only from a position of rest, without effort and in harmony with his surroundings.
    The Preacher shook his guide's shoulder. "Is it a child, truly a child?" 
    "Aiya," the youth said, keeping a fearful attention on Leto. 
    A great shuddering sigh shook The Preacher. "No," he said. 
    "It is a demon in child form," the guide said. 
    "You will spend the night here," Leto said.
    "We will do as he says," The Preacher said. He released his grip on the guide, slipped off the worm's side and slid down a ring to the sand, leaping clear when his feet touched. Turning, he said: "Take the worm off and send it back into the sand. It is tired and will not bother us." 
    "The worm will not go!" the youth protested.
    "It will go," Leto said. "But if you try to flee on it, I'll let it eat you." He moved to one side out of the worm's sensory range, pointed in the direction they had come. "Go that way." 
    The youth tapped a goad against the ring behind him, wiggled a hook where it held a ring open. Slowly the worm began to slide over the sand, turning as the youth shifted his hook down a side.
    The Preacher, following the sound of Leto's voice, clambered up the duneslope and stood two paces away. It was done with a swift sureness which told Leto this would be no easy contest. 
    Here the visions parted.
    Leto said: "Remove your suit mask, father." 
    The Preacher obeyed, dropping the fold of his hood and withdrawing the mouth cover.
    Knowing his own appearance, Leto studied this face, seeing the lines of likeness as though they'd been outlined in light. The lines formed an indefinable reconciliation, a pathway of genes without sharp boundaries, and there was no mistaking them. Those lines came down to Leto from the humming days, from the water-dripping days, from the miracle seas of Caladan. But now they stood at a dividing point on Arrakis as night waited to fold itself into the dunes.
    "So father," Leto said glancing to the left where he could see the youthful guide trudging back to them from where the worm had been abandoned.
    "Mu zein! "'The Preacher said, waving his right hand in a cutting gesture. This is no good!
    "Koolish zein," Leto said, voice soft. This is all the good we may ever have. And he added, speaking in Chakobsa, the Atreides battle language: "Here I am; here I remain! We cannot forget that, father."
    The Preacher's shoulders sagged. He put both hands to his empty sockets in a long-unused gesture.
    "I gave you the sight of my eyes once and took your memories," Leto said. "I know your decisions and I've been to that place where you hid yourself."
    "I know." The Preacher lowered his hands. "You will remain?"
    "You named me for the man who put that on his coat of arms," Leto said. "J'y suis, j'y reste!"
    The Preacher sighed deeply. "How far has it gone, this thing you've done to yourself?" 
    "My skin is not my own, father."
    The Preacher shuddered. "Then I know how you found me here."
    "Yes, I fastened my memory to a place my flesh had never known," Leto said. "I need an evening with my father." 
    "I'm not your father. I'm only a poor copy, a relic." He turned his head toward the sound of the approaching guide. "I no longer go to the visions for my future."
    As he spoke, darkness covered the desert. Stars leaped out above them and Leto, too, turned toward the approaching guide. "Wubakh ul kuhar!" Leto called to the youth. "Greetings!" 
    Back came the response: "Subakh un nar!"
    Speaking in a hoarse whisper, The Preacher said: "That young Assan Tariq is a dangerous one."
    "All of the Cast Out are dangerous," Leto said. "But not to me." He spoke in a low, conversational tone.
    "If that's your vision, I will not share it," The Preacher said.
    "Perhaps you have no choice," Leto said. "You are the fit-haquiqa. The Reality. You are Abu Dhur, Father of the Indefinite Roads of Time."
    "I'm no more than bait in a trap," The Preacher said, and his voice was bitter.
    "And Alia already has eaten that bait," Leto said. "But I don't like its taste." 
    "You cannot do this!" The Preacher hissed. 
    "I've already done it. My skin is not my own." 
    "Perhaps it's not too late for you to --"
    "It is too late." Leto bent his head to one side. He could hear Assan Tariq trudging up the duneslope toward them, coming to the sound of their voices. "Greetings, Assan Tariq of Shuloch," Leto said.
    The youth stopped just below Leto on the slope, a dark shadow there in the starlight. There was indecision in the set of his shoulders, the way he tipped his head.
    "Yes," Leto said, "I'm the one who escaped from Shuloch." 
    "When I heard . . ." The Preacher began. And again: "You cannot do this!" 
    "I am doing it. What matter if you're made blind once more?" 
    "You think I fear that?" The Preacher asked. "Do you not see the fine guide they have provided for me?"
    "I see him." Again Leto faced Tariq. "Didn't you hear me, Assan? I'm the one who escaped from Shuloch." 
    "You're a demon," the youth quavered.
    "Your demon," Leto said. "But you are my demon." And Leto felt the tension grow between himself and his father. It was a shadow play all around them, a projection of unconscious forms. And Leto felt the memories of his father, a form of backward prophecy which sorted visions from the familiar reality of this moment.
    Tariq sensed it, this battle of the visions. He slid several paces backward down the slope.
    "You cannot control the future," The Preacher whispered, and the sound of his voice was filled with effort as though he lifted a great weight.
    Leto felt the dissonance between them then. It was an element of the universe with which his entire life grappled. Either he or his father would be forced to act soon, making a decision by that act, choosing a vision. And his father was right: trying for some ultimate control of the universe, you only built weapons with which the universe eventually defeated you. To choose and manage a vision required you to balance on a single, thin thread -- playing God on a high tightwire with cosmic solitude on both sides. Neither contestant could retreat into death-as-surcease-from-paradox. Each knew the visions and the rules. All of the old illusions were dying. And when one contestant moved, the other might countermove. The only real truth that mattered to them now was that which separated them from the vision background. There was no place of safety, only a transitory shifting of relationships, marked out within the limits which they now imposed and bound for inevitable changes. Each of them had only a desperate and lonely courage upon which to rely, but Leto possessed two advantages: he had committed himself upon a path from which there was no turning back, and he had accepted the terrible consequences to himself. His father still hoped there was a way back and had made no final commitment. 
    "You must not! You must not!" The Preacher rasped. 
    He sees my advantage, Leto thought.
    Leto spoke in a conversational tone, masking his own tensions, the balancing effort this other-level contest required. "I have no passionate belief in truth, no faith other than what I create," he said. And he felt then a movement between himself and his father, something with granular characteristics which touched only Leto's own passionately subjective belief in himself. By such belief he knew that he posted the markers of the Golden Path. Someday such markers could tell others how to be human, a strange gift from a creature who no longer would be human on that day. But these markers were always set in place by gamblers. Leto felt them scattered throughout the landscape of his inner lives and, feeling this, poised himself for the ultimate gamble.
    Softly he sniffed the air, seeking the signal which both he and his father knew must come. One question remained: Would his father warn the terrified young guide who waited below them?
    Presently Leto sensed ozone in his nostrils, the betraying odor of a shield. True to his orders from the Cast Out, young Tariq was trying to kill both of these dangerous Atreides, not knowing the horrors which this would precipitate. 
    "Don't," The Preacher whispered.
    But Leto knew the signal was a true one. He sensed ozone, but there was no tingling in the air around them. Tariq used a pseudo-shield in the desert, a weapon developed exclusively for Arrakis. The Holtzmann Effect would summon a worm while it maddened that worm. Nothing would stop such a worm -- not water, not the presence of sandtrout . . . nothing. Yes, the youth had planted the device in the duneslope and was beginning to edge away from the danger zone.
    Leto launched himself off the dunetop, hearing his father scream in protest. But the awful impetus of Leto's amplified muscles threw his body like a missile. One outflung hand caught the neck of Tariq's stillsuit, the other slapped around to grip the doomed youth's robe at the waist. There came a single snap as the neck broke. Leto rolled, lifting his body like a finely balanced instrument which dove directly into the sand where the pseudo-shield had been hidden. Fingers found the thing and he had it out of the sand, throwing it in a looping arc far out to the south of them.
    Presently there came a great hissing-thrashing din out on the desert where the pseudo-shield had gone. It subsided, and silence returned.
    Leto looked up to the top of the dune where his father stood, still defiant, but defeated. That was Paul Muad'Dib up there, blind, angry, near despair as a consequence of his flight from the vision which Leto had accepted. Paul's mind would be reflecting now upon the Zensunni Long Koan: "In the one act of predicting an accurate future, Muad'Dib introduced an element of development and growth into the very prescience through which he saw human existence. By this, he brought uncertainty onto himself. Seeking the absolute of orderly prediction, he amplified disorder, distorted prediction."
    Returning to the dunetop in a single leap, Leto said: "Now I'm your guide." 
    "Never!"
    "Would you go back to Shuloch? Even if they'd welcome you when you arrived without Tariq, where has Shuloch gone now? Do your eyes see it?"
    Paul confronted his son then, aiming the eyeless sockets at Leto. "Do you really know the universe you have created here?" 
    Leto heard the particular emphasis. The vision which both of them knew had been set into terrible motion here had required an act of creation at a certain point in time. For that moment, the entire sentient universe shared a linear view of time which possessed characteristics of orderly progression. They entered this time as they might step onto a moving vehicle, and they could only leave it the same way.
    Against this, Leto held the multi-thread reins, balanced in his own vision-lighted view of time as multilinear and multilooped. He was the sighted man in the universe of the blind. Only he could scatter the orderly rationale because his father no longer held the reins. In Leto's view, a son had altered the past. And a thought as yet undreamed in the farthest future could reflect upon the now and move his hand.
    Only his hand.
    Paul knew this because he no longer could see how Leto might manipulate the reins, could only recognize the inhuman consequences which Leto had accepted. And he thought: Here is the change for which I prayed. Why do I fear it? Because it's the Golden Path!
    "I'm here to give purpose to evolution and, therefore, to give purpose to our lives," Leto said.
    "Do you wish to live those thousands of years, changing as you now know you will change?"
    Leto recognized that his father was not speaking about physical changes. Both of them knew the physical consequences: Leto would adapt and adapt; the skin-which-was-not-his-own would adapt and adapt. The evolutionary thrust of each part would melt into the other and a single transformation would emerge. When metamorphosis came, if it came, a thinking creature of awesome dimensions would emerge upon the universe -- and that universe would worship him.
    No . . . Paul was referring to the inner changes, the thoughts and decisions which would inflict themselves upon the worshipers.
    "Those who think you dead," Leto said, "you know what they say about your last words." 
    "Of course."
    " 'Now I do what all life must do in the service of life,' " Leto said. "You never said that, but a Priest who thought you could never return and call him liar put those words into your mouth." 
    "I'd not call him liar." Paul took in a deep breath. "Those are good last words."
    "Would you stay here or return to that hut in the basin of Shuloch?" Leto asked.
    "This is your universe now," Paul said.
    The words filled with defeat cut through Leto. Paul had tried to guide the last strands of a personal vision, a choice he'd made years before in Sietch Tabr. For that, he'd accepted his role as an instrument of revenge for the Cast Out, the remnants of Jacurutu. They had contaminated him, but he'd accepted this rather than his view of this universe which Leto had chosen.
    The sadness in Leto was so great he could not speak for several minutes. When he could manage his voice, Leto said: "So you baited Alia, tempted her and confused her into inaction and the wrong decisions. And now she knows who you are." 
    "She knows . . . Yes, she knows."
    Paul's voice was old then and filled with hidden protests. There was a reserve of defiance in him, though. He said: "I'll take the vision away from you if I can."
    "Thousands of peaceful years," Leto said. "That's what I'll give them." 
    "Dormancy! Stagnation!"
    "Of course. And those forms of violence which I permit. It'll be a lesson which humankind will never forget."
    "I spit on your lesson!" Paul said. "You think I've not seen a thing similar to what you choose?" 
    "You saw it," Leto agreed.
    "Is your vision any better than mine?" 
    "Not one whit better. Worse, perhaps," Leto said. 
    "Then what can I do but resist you?" Paul demanded. 
    "Kill me, perhaps?"
    "I'm not that innocent. I know what you've set in motion. I know about the broken qanats and the unrest."
    "And now Assan Tariq will never return to Shuloch. You must go back with me or not at all because this is my vision now." 
    "I choose not to go back."
    How old his voice sounds, Leto thought, and the thought was a wrenching pain. He said: "I've the hawk ring of the Atreides concealed in my dishdasha. Do you wish me to return it to you?" 
    "If I'd only died," Paul whispered. "I truly wanted to die when I went into the desert that night, but I knew I could not leave this world. I had to come back and --"
    "Restore the legend," Leto said. "I know. And the jackals of Jacurutu were waiting for you that night as you knew they would be. They wanted your visions! You knew that." 
    "I refused. I never gave them one vision."
    "But they contaminated you. They fed you spice essence and plied you with women and dreams. And you did have visions." 
    "Sometimes." How sly his voice sounded. 
    "Will you take back your hawk ring?" Leto asked.
    Paul sat down suddenly on the sand, a dark blotch in the starlight. "No!"
    So he knows the futility of that path, Leto thought. This revealed much, but not enough. The contest of the visions had moved from its delicate plane of choices down to a gross discarding of alternates. Paul knew he could not win, but he hoped yet to nullify that single vision to which Leto clung.
    Presently Paul said: "Yes, I was contaminated by the Jacurutu. But you contaminate yourself." 
    "That's true," Leto admitted. "I am your son." 
    "And are you a good Fremen?" 
    "Yes."
    "Will you permit a blind man to go into the desert finally? Will you let me find peace on my own terms?" He pounded the sand beside him.
    "No, I'll not permit that," Leto said. "But it's your right to fall upon your knife if you insist upon it." 
    "And you would have my body!" 
    "True." 
    "No!"
    And so he knows that path, Leto thought. The enshrining of Muad'Dib's body by his son could be contrived as a form of cement for Leto's vision.
    "You never told them, did you, father?" Leto asked. 
    "I never told them."
    "But I told them," Leto said. "I told Muriz. Kralizec, the Typhoon Struggle."
    Paul's shoulders sagged. "You cannot," he whispered. "You cannot."
    "I am a creature of this desert now, father," Leto said. "Would you speak thus to a Coriolis storm?"
    "You think me coward for refusing that path," Paul said, his voice husky and trembling. "Oh, I understand you well, son. Augury and haruspication have always been their own torments. But I was never lost in the possible futures because this one is unspeakable!"
    "Your Jihad will be a summer picnic on Caladan by comparison," Leto agreed. "I'll take you to Gurney Halleck now." 
    "Gurney! He serves the Sisterhood through my mother." 
    And now Leto understood the extent of his father's vision. "No, father. Gurney no longer serves anyone. I know the place to find him and I can take you there. It's time for the new legend to be created."
    "I see that I cannot sway you. Let me touch you, then, for you are my son."
    Leto held out his right hand to meet the groping fingers, felt their strength, matched it, and resisted every shift of Paul's arm. "Not even a poisoned knife will harm me now," Leto said. "I'm already a different chemistry."
    Tears slipped from the sightless eyes and Paul released his grip, dropped his hand to his side. "If I'd chosen your way, I'd have become the bicouros of shaitan. What will you become?" 
    "For a time they'll call me the missionary of shaitan, too," Leto said. "Then they'll begin to wonder and, finally, they'll understand. You didn't take your vision far enough, father. Your hands did good things and evil." 
    "But the evil was known after the event!"
    "Which is the way of many great evils," Leto said. "You crossed over only into a part of my vision. Was your strength not enough?"
    "You know I couldn't stay there. I could never do an evil act which was known before the act. I'm not Jacurutu." He clambered to his feet. "Do you think me one of those who laughs alone at night?"
    "It is sad that you were never really Fremen," Leto said. "We Fremen know how to commission the arifa. Our judges can choose between evils. It's always been that way for us."
    "Fremen, is it? Slaves of the fate you helped to make?" Paul stepped toward Leto, reached out in an oddly shy movement, touched Leto's sheathed arm, explored up it to where the membrane exposed an ear, then the cheek and, finally, the mouth. "Ahhhh, that is your own flesh yet," he said. "Where will that flesh take you?" He dropped his hand.
    "Into a place where humans may create their futures from instant to instant." 
    "So you say. An Abomination might say the same." 
    "I'm not Abomination, though I might've been," Leto said. "I saw how it goes with Alia. A demon lives in her, father. Ghani and I know that demon: it's the Baron, your grandfather." 
    Paul buried his face in his hands. His shoulders shook for a moment, then he lowered his hands and his mouth was set in a harsh line. "There is a curse upon our House. I prayed that you would throw that ring into the sand, that you'd deny me and run away to make . . . another life. It was there for you." 
    "At what price?"
    After a long silence, Paul said: "The end adjusts the path behind it. Just once I failed to fight for my principles. Just once. I accepted the Mahdinate. I did it for Chani, but it made me a bad leader."
    Leto found he couldn't answer this. The memory of that decision was there within him.
    "I cannot lie to you any more than I could lie to myself," Paul said. "I know this. Every man should have such an auditor. I will only ask this one thing: is the Typhoon Struggle necessary?" 
    "It's that or humans will be extinguished."
    Paul heard the truth in Leto's words, spoke in a low voice which acknowledged the greater breadth of his son's vision. "I did not see that among the choices."
    "I believe the Sisterhood suspects it," Leto said. "I cannot accept any other explanation of my grandmother's decision." 
    The night wind blew coldly around them then. It whipped Paul's robe around his legs. He trembled. Seeing this, Leto said: "You've a kit, father. I'll inflate the tent and we can spend this night in comfort."
    But Paul could only shake his head, knowing he would have no comfort from this night or any other. Muad'Dib, The Hero, must be destroyed. He'd said it himself. Only The Preacher could go on now.

= = = = = =

Fremen were the first humans to develop a conscious/unconscious symbology through which to experience the movements and relationships of their planetary system. They were the first people anywhere to express climate in terms of a semi-mathematic language whose written symbols embody (and internalize) the external relationships. The language itself was part of the system it described. Its written form carried the shape of what it described. The intimate local knowledge of what was available to support life was implicit in this development. One can measure the extent of this language/system interaction by the fact that Fremen accepted themselves as foraging and browsing animals.
-The Story of Liet-Kynes by Harq al-Ada

    "Kaveh wahid," Stilgar said. Bring coffee. He signaled with a raised hand to an aide who stood at one side near the single door to the austere rock-walled room where he had spent this wakeful night. This was the place where the old Fremen Naib usually took his spartan breakfast, and it was almost breakfast time, but after such a night he did not feel hungry. He stood, stretching his muscles.
    Duncan Idaho sat on a low cushion near the door, trying to suppress a yawn. He had just realized that, while they talked, he and Stilgar had gone through an entire night.
    "Forgive me, Stil," he said. "I've kept you up all night." 
    "To stay awake all night adds a day to your life," Stilgar said, accepting the tray with coffee as it was passed in the door. He pushed a low bench in front of Idaho, placed the tray on it and sat across from his guest.
    Both men wore the yellow robes of mourning, but Idaho's was a borrowed garment worn because the people of Tabr had resented the Atreides green of his working uniform.
    Stilgar poured the dark brew from the fat copper carafe, sipped first, and lifted his cup as a signal to Idaho -- the ancient Fremen custom: "It is safe; I have taken some of it. "
    The coffee was Harah's work, done just as Stilgar preferred it: the beans roasted to a rose-brown, ground to a fine powder in a stone mortar while still hot, and boiled immediately; a pinch of melange added.
    Idaho inhaled the spice-rich aroma, sipped carefully but noisily. He still did not know if he had convinced Stilgar. His mentat faculties had begun to work sluggishly in the early hours of the morning, all of his computations confronted at last by the inescapable datum supplied in the message from Gurney Halleck. 
    Alia had known about Leto! She'd known. 
    And Javid had to be a part of that knowing.
    "I must be freed of your restraints," Idaho said at last, taking up the arguments once more.
    Stilgar stood his ground. "The agreement of neutrality requires me to make hard judgments, Ghani is safe here. You and Irulan are safe here. But you may not send messages. Receive messages, yes, but you may not send them. I've given my word." 
    "This is not the treatment usually accorded a guest and an old friend who has shared your dangers," Idaho said, knowing he'd used this argument before.
    Stilgar put down his cup, setting it carefully into its place on the tray and keeping his attention on it as he spoke. "We Fremen don't feel guilt for the same things that arouse such feelings in others," he said. He raised his attention to Idaho's face.
    He must be made to take Ghani and flee this place, Idaho thought. He said: "It was not my intention to raise a storm of guilt." 
    "I understand that," Stilgar said. "I raise the question to impress upon you our Fremen attitude, because that is what we are dealing with: Fremen. Even Alia thinks Fremen." 
    "And the Priests?"
    "They are another matter," Stilgar said. "They want the people to swallow the grey wind of sin, taking that into the everlasting. This is a great blotch by which they seek to know their own piety." He spoke in a level voice, but Idaho heard the bitterness and wondered why that bitterness could not sway Stilgar.
    "It's an old, old trick of autocratic rule," Idaho said. "Alia knows it well. Good subjects must feel guilty. The guilt begins as a feeling of failure. The good autocrat provides many opportunities for failure in the populace."
    "I've noticed." Stilgar spoke dryly. "But you must forgive me if I mention to you once more that this is your wife of whom you speak. It is the sister of Muad'Dib." 
    "She's possessed, I tell you!"
    "Many say it. She will have to undergo the test one day. Meanwhile there are other considerations more important." 
    Idaho shook his head sadly. "Everything I've told you can be verified. The communication with Jacurutu was always through Alia's Temple. The plot against the twins had accomplices there. Money for the sale of worms off-planet goes there. All of the strings lead to Alia's office, to the Regency."
    Stilgar shook his head, drew in a deep breath. "This is neutral territory. I've given my word." 
    "Things can't go on this way!" Idaho protested.
    "I agree." Stilgar nodded. "Alia's caught inside the circle and every day the circle grows smaller. It's like our old custom of having many wives. This pinpoints male sterility." He bent a questioning gaze on Idaho. "You say she deceived you with other men -- 'using her sex as a weapon' is the way I believe you've expressed it. Then you have a perfectly legal avenue available to you. Javid's here in Tabr with messages from Alia. You have only to --" 
    "On your neutral territory?" 
    "No, but outside in the desert . . ." 
    "And if I took that opportunity to escape?" 
    "You'll not be given such an opportunity."
    "Still, I swear to you, Alia's possessed. What do I have to do to convince you of --"
    "A difficult thing to prove," Stilgar said. It was the argument he'd used many times during the night.
    Idaho recalled Jessica's words, said: "But you've ways of proving it."
    "A way, yes," Stilgar said. Again he shook his head. "Painful, irrevocable. That is why I remind you about our attitude toward guilt. We can free ourselves from guilts which might destroy us in everything except the Trial of Possession. For that, the tribunal, which is all of the people, accepts complete responsibility." 
    "You've done it before, haven't you?"
    "I'm sure the Reverend Mother didn't omit our history in her recital," Stilgar said. "You well know we've done it before." 
    Idaho responded to the irritation in Stilgar's voice. "I wasn't trying to trap you in a falsehood. It's just --"
    "It's the long night and the questions without answers," Stilgar said. "And now it's morning." 
    "I must be allowed to send a message to Jessica," Idaho said. 
    "That would be a message to Salusa," Stilgar said. "I don't make evening promises. My word is meant to be kept; that is why Tabr's neutral territory. I will hold you in silence. I have pledged this for my entire household." 
    "Alia must be brought to your Trial!"
    "Perhaps. First, we must find out if there are extenuating circumstances. A failure of authority, possibly. Or even bad luck. It could be a case of that natural bad tendency which all humans share, and not possession at all."
    "You want to be sure I'm not just the husband wronged, seeking others to execute his revenge," Idaho said.
    "The thought has occurred to others, not to me," Stilgar said. He smiled to take the sting out of his words. "We Fremen have our science of tradition, our hadith. When we fear a mentat or a Reverend Mother, we revert to the hadith. It is said that the only fear we cannot correct is the fear of our own mistakes." 
    "The Lady Jessica must be told," Idaho said. "Gurney says --" 
    "That message may not come from Gurney Halleck." 
    "It comes from no other. We Atreides have our ways of verifying messages. Stil, won't you at least explore some of --" 
    "Jacurutu is no more," Stilgar said. "It was destroyed many generations ago." He touched Idaho's sleeve. "In any event, I cannot spare the fighting men. These are troubled times, the threat to the qanat . . . you understand?" He sat back. "Now, when Alia --" 
    "There is no more Alia," Idaho said.
    "So you say." Stilgar took another sip of coffee, replaced the cup. "Let it rest there, friend Idaho. Often there's no need to tear off an arm to remove a splinter." 
    "Then let's talk about Ghanima."
    "There's no need. She has my countenance, my bond. No one can harm her here." 
    He cannot be that naive, Idaho thought.
    But Stilgar was rising to indicate that the interview was ended.
    Idaho levered himself to his feet, feeling the stiffness in his knees. His calves felt numb. As Idaho stood, an aide entered and stood aside. Javid came into the room behind him. Idaho turned. Stilgar stood four paces away. Without hesitating, Idaho drew his knife in one swift motion and drove its point into the breast of the unsuspecting Javid. The man staggered backward, pulling himself off the knife. He turned, fell onto his face. His legs kicked and he was dead.
    "That was to silence the gossip," Idaho said.
    The aide stood with drawn knife, undecided how to react. Idaho had already sheathed his own knife, leaving a trace of blood on the edge of his yellow robe.
    "You have defiled my honor!" Stilgar cried. "This is neutral --"
    "Shut up!" Idaho glared at the shocked Naib. "You wear a collar, Stilgar!"
    It was one of the three most deadly insults which could be directed at a Fremen. Stilgar's face went pale.
    "You are a servant," Idaho said. "You've sold Fremen for their water."
    This was the second most deadly insult, the one which had destroyed the original Jacurutu.
    Stilgar ground his teeth, put a hand on his crysknife. The aide stepped back away from the body in the doorway.
    Turning his back on the Naib, Idaho stepped into the door, taking the narrow opening beside Javid's body and speaking without turning, delivered the third insult. "You have no immortality, Stilgar. None of your descendants carry your blood!" 
    "Where do you go now, mentat?" Stilgar called as Idaho continued leaving the room. Stilgar's voice was as cold as a wind from the poles.
    "To find Jacurutu," Idaho said, still not turning. 
    Stilgar drew his knife. "Perhaps I can help you." 
    Idaho was at the outer lip of the passage now. Without stopping, he said: "If you'd help me with your knife, water-thief, please do it in my back. That's the fitting way for one who wears the collar of a demon."
    With two leaping strides Stilgar crossed the room, stepped on Javid's body and caught Idaho in the outer passage. One gnarled hand jerked Idaho around and to a stop. Stilgar confronted Idaho with bared teeth and a drawn knife. Such was his rage that Stilgar did not even see the curious smile on Idaho's face. 
    "Draw your knife, mentat scum!" Stilgar roared.
    Idaho laughed. He cuffed Stilgar sharply -- left hand, right hand -- two stinging slaps to the head.
    With an incoherent screech, Stilgar drove his knife into Idaho's abdomen, striking upward through the diaphragm into the heart.
    Idaho sagged onto the blade, grinned up at Stilgar, whose rage dissolved into sudden icy shock.
    "Two deaths for the Atreides," Idaho husked. "The second for no better reason than the first." He lurched sideways, collapsed to the stone floor on his face. Blood spread out from his wound.
    Stilgar stared down past his dripping knife at the body of Idaho, took a deep, trembling breath. Javid lay dead behind him. And the consort of Alia, the Womb of Heaven, lay dead at Stilgar's own hands. It might be argued that a Naib had but protected the honor of his name, avenging the threat to his promised neutrality. But this dead man was Duncan Idaho. No matter the arguments available, no matter the "extenuating circumstances," nothing could erase such an act. Even were Alia to approve privately, she would be forced to respond publicly in revenge. She was, after all, Fremen. To rule Fremen, she could be nothing else, not even to the smallest degree.
    Only then did it occur to Stilgar that this situation was precisely what Idaho had intended to buy with his "second death." 
    Stilgar looked up, saw the shocked face of Harah, his second wife, peering at him in an enclosing throng. Everywhere Stilgar turned there were faces with identical expressions: shock and an understanding of the consequences.
    Slowly Stilgar drew himself erect, wiped the blade on his sleeve and sheathed it. Speaking to the faces, his tone casual, he said: "Those who'll go with me should pack at once. Send men to summon worms." 
    "Where will you go, Stilgar?" Harah asked. 
    "Into the desert." 
    "I will go with you," she said.
    "Of course you'll go with me. All of my wives will go with me. And Ghanima. Get her, Harah. At once." 
    "Yes, Stilgar . . . at once." She hesitated. "And Irulan?" 
    "If she wishes."
    "Yes, husband." Still she hesitated. "You take Ghani as hostage?"
    "Hostage?" He was genuinely startled by the thought. "Woman . . ." He touched Idaho's body softly with a toe. "If this mentat was right. I'm Ghani's only hope." And he remembered then Leto's warning: "Beware of Alia. You must take Ghani and flee."

= = = = = =

After the Fremen, all Planetologists see life as expressions of energy and look for the overriding relationships. In small pieces, bits and parcels which grow into general understanding, the Fremen racial wisdom is translated into a new certainty. The thing Fremen have as a people, any people can have. They need but develop a sense for energy relationships. They need but observe that energy soaks up the patterns of things and builds with those patterns.
-The Arrakeen Catastrophe, After Harq al-Ada

    It was Tuek's Sietch on the inner lip of False Wall. Halleck stood in the shadow of the rock buttress which shielded the high entrance to the sietch, waiting for those inside to decide whether they would shelter him. He turned his gaze outward to the northern desert and then upward to the grey-blue morning sky. The smugglers here had been astonished to learn that he, an off-worlder, had captured a worm and ridden it. But Halleck had been equally astonished at their reaction. The thing was simple for an agile man who'd seen it done many times.
    Halleck returned his attention to the desert, the silver desert of shining rocks and grey-green fields where water had worked its magic. All of this struck him suddenly as an enormously fragile containment of energy, of life -- everything threatened by an abrupt shift in the pattern of change.
    He knew the source of this reaction. It was the bustling scene on the desert floor below him. Containers of dead sandtrout were being trundled into the sietch for distillation and recovery of their water. There were thousands of the creatures. They had come to an outpouring of water. And it was this outpouring which had set Halleck's mind racing.
    Halleck stared downward across the sietch fields and the qanat boundary which no longer flowed with precious water. He had seen the holes in the qanat's stone walls, the rending of the rock liner which had spilled water into the sand. What had made those holes? Some stretched along twenty meters of the qanat's most vulnerable sections, in places where soft sand led outward into water-absorbing depressions. It was those depressions which had swarmed with sandtrout. The children of the sietch were killing them and capturing them.
    Repair teams worked on the shattered walls of the qanat. Others carried minims of irrigation water to the most needy plants. The water source in the gigantic cistern beneath Tuek's windtrap had been closed off, preventing the flow into the shattered qanat. The sun-powered pumps had been disconnected. The irrigation water came from dwindling pools at the bottom of the qanat and, laboriously, from the cistern within the sietch.
    The metal frame of the doorseal behind Halleck crackled in the growing warmth of the day. As though the sound moved his eyes, Halleck found his gaze drawn to the farthest curve of the qanat, to the place where water had reached most impudently into the desert. The garden-hopeful planners of the sietch had planted a special tree there and it was doomed unless the water flow could be restored soon. Halleck stared at the silly, trailing plumage of a willow tree there shredded by sand and wind. For him, that tree symbolized the new reality for himself and for Arrakis. 
    Both of us are alien here.
    They were taking a long time over their decision within the sietch, but they could use good fighting men. Smugglers always needed good men. Halleck had no illusions about them, though. The smugglers of this age were not the smugglers who'd sheltered him so many years ago when he'd fled the dissolution of his Duke's fief. No, these were a new breed, quick to seek profit.
    Again he focused on the silly willow. It came to Halleck then that the stormwinds of his new reality might shred these smugglers and all of their friends. It might destroy Stilgar with his fragile neutrality and take with him all of the tribes who remained loyal to Alia. They'd all become colonial peoples. Halleck had seen it happen before, knowing the bitter taste of it on his own homeworld. He saw it clearly, recalling the mannerisms of the city Fremen, the pattern of the suburbs, and the unmistakable ways of the rural sietch which rubbed off even on this smugglers' hideaway. The rural districts were colonies of the urban centers. They'd learned how to wear a padded yoke, led into it by their greed if not their superstitions. Even here, especially here, the people had the attitude of a subject population, not the attitude of free men. They were defensive, concealing, evasive. Any manifestation of authority was subject to resentment -- any authority: the Regency's, Stilgar's, their own Council . . .
    I can't trust them, Halleck thought. He could only use them and nurture their distrust of others. It was sad. Gone was the old give and take of free men. The old ways had been reduced to ritual words, their origins lost to memory.
    Alia had done her work well, punishing opposition and rewarding assistance, shifting the Imperial forces in random fashion, concealing the major elements of her Imperial power. The spies! Gods below, the spies she must have!
    Halleck could almost see the deadly rhythm of movement and countermovement by which Alia hoped to keep her opposition off balance.
    If the Fremen remain dormant, she'll win, he thought.
    The doorseal behind him crackled as it was opened. A sietch attendant named Melides emerged. He was a short man with a gourd-like body which dwindled into spindly legs whose ugliness was only accented by a stillsuit.
    "You have been accepted," Melides said.
    And Halleck heard the sly dissimulation in the man's voice. What that voice revealed told Halleck there was sanctuary here for only a limited time.
    Just until I can steal one of their 'thopters, he thought.
    "My gratitude to your Council," he said. And he thought of Esmar Tuek, for whom this sietch had been named. Esmar, long dead of someone's treachery, would have slit the throat of this Melides on sight.

= = = = = =

Any path which narrows future possibilities may become a lethal trap. Humans are not threading their way through a maze; they scan a vast horizon filled with unique opportunities. The narrowing viewpoint of the maze should appeal only to creatures with their noses buried in sand. Sexually produced uniqueness and differences are the life-protection of the spices.
-The Spacing Guild Handbook

    "Why do I not feel grief?" Alia directed the question at the ceiling of her small audience chamber, a room she could cross in ten paces one way and fifteen the other. It had two tall and narrow windows which looked out across the Arrakeen rooftops at the Shield Wall.
    It was almost noon. The sun burned down into the pan upon which the city had been built.
    Alia lowered her gaze to Buer Agarves, the former Tabrite and now aide to Zia who directed the Temple guards. Agarves had brought the news that Javid and Idaho were dead. A mob of sycophants, aides and guards had come in with him and more crowded the areaway outside, revealing that they already knew Agarves's message.
    Bad news traveled fast on Arrakis.
    He was a small man, this Agarves, with a round face for a Fremen, almost infantile in its roundness. He was one of the new breed who had gone to water-fatness. Alia saw him as though he had been split into two images: one with a serious face and opaque indigo eyes, a worried expression around the mouth, the other image sensuous and vulnerable, excitingly vulnerable. She especially liked the thickness of his lips.
    Although it was not yet noon, Alia felt something in the shocked silence around her that spoke of sunset. 
    Idaho should've died at sunset, she told herself.
    "How is it, Buer, that you're the bearer of this news?" she asked, noting the watchful quickness which came into his expression,
    Agarves tried to swallow, spoke in a hoarse voice hardly more than a whisper. "I went with Javid, you recall? And when . . . Stilgar sent me to you, he said for me to tell you that I carried his final obedience." 
    "Final obedience," she echoed. "What'd he mean by that?" 
    "I don't know, Lady Alia," he pleaded.
    "Explain to me again what you saw," she ordered, and she wondered at how cold her skin felt.
    "I saw . . ." He bobbed his head nervously, looked at the floor in front of Alia. "I saw the Holy Consort dead upon the floor of the central passage, and Javid lay dead nearby in a side passage. The women already were preparing them for Huanui." 
    "And Stilgar summoned you to this scene?" 
    "That is true, My Lady. Stilgar summoned me. He sent Modibo, the Bent One, his messenger in sietch. Modibo gave me no warning. He merely told me Stilgar wanted me." 
    "And you saw my husband's body there on the floor?" 
    He met her eyes with a darting glance, returned his attention once more to the floor in front of her before nodding. "Yes, My Lady. And Javid dead nearby. Stilgar told me . . . told me that the Holy Consort had slain Javid." 
    "And my husband, you say Stilgar --"
    "He said it to me with his own mouth, My Lady. Stilgar said he had done this. He said the Holy Consort provoked him to rage." 
    "Rage," Alia repeated. "How was that done?" 
    "He didn't say. No one said. I asked and no one said." 
    "And that's when you were sent to me with this news?" 
    "Yes, My Lady." 
    "Was there nothing you could do?"
    Agarves wet his lips with his tongue, then: "Stilgar commanded, My Lady. It was his sietch." 
    "I see. And you always obeyed Stilgar." 
    "I always did. My Lady, until he freed me from my bond." 
    "When you were sent to my service, you mean?" 
    "I obey only you now, My Lady."
    "Is that right? Tell me, Buer, if I commanded you to slay Stilgar, your old Naib, would you do it?"
    He met her gaze with a growing firmness. "If you commanded it, My Lady." 
    "I do command it. Have you any idea where he's gone?" 
    "Into the desert; that's all I know, My Lady." 
    "How many men did he take?" 
    "Perhaps half the effectives." 
    "And Ghanima and Irulan with him!"
    "Yes, My Lady. Those who left are burdened with their women, their children and their baggage. Stilgar gave everyone a choice -- go with him or be freed of their bond. Many chose to be freed. They will select a new Naib."
    "I'll select their new Naib! And it'll be you, Buer Agarves, on the day you bring me Stilgar's head."
    Agarves could accept selection by battle. It was a Fremen way. He said: "As you command, My Lady. What forces may I --" 
    "See Zia. I can't give you many 'thopters for the search. They're needed elsewhere. But you'll have enough fighting men. Stilgar has defamed his honor. Many will serve with you gladly." 
    "I'll get about it, then, My Lady."
    "Wait!" She studied him a moment, reviewing whom she could send to watch over this vulnerable infant. He would need close watching until he'd proved himself. Zia would know whom to send.
    "Am I not dismissed, My Lady?"
    "You are not dismissed. I must consult you privately and at length on your plans to take Stilgar." She put a hand to her face. "I'll not grieve until you've exacted my revenge. Give me a few minutes to compose myself." She lowered her hand. "One of my attendants will show you the way." She gave a subtle hand signal to one of her attendants, whispered to Shalus, her new Dame of Chamber: "Have him washed and perfumed before you bring him. He smells of worm." 
    "Yes, mistress."
    Alia turned then, feigning the grief she did not feel, and fled to her private chambers. There, in her bedroom, she slammed the door into its tracks, cursed and stamped her foot. 
    Damn that Duncan! Why? Why? Why?
    She sensed a deliberate provocation from Idaho. He'd slain Javid and provoked Stilgar. It said he knew about Javid. The whole thing must be taken as a message from Duncan Idaho, a final gesture.
    Again she stamped her foot and again, raging across the bedchamber.
    Damn him! Damn him! Damn him!
    Stilgar gone over to the rebels and Ghanima with him. Irulan, too.
    Damn them all!
    Her stamping foot encountered a painful obstacle, descending onto metal. Pain brought a cry from her and she peered down, finding that she'd bruised her foot on a metal buckle. She snatched it up, stood frozen at the sight of it in her hand. It was an old buckle, one of the silver-and-platinum originals from Caladan awarded originally by the Duke Leto Atreides I to his swordmaster, Duncan Idaho. She'd seen Duncan wear it many times. And he'd discarded it here.
    Alia's fingers clutched convulsively on the buckle. Idaho had left it here when . . . when . . .
    Tears sprang from her eyes, forced out against the great Fremen conditioning. Her mouth drew down into a frozen grimace and she sensed the old battle begin within her skull, reaching out to her fingertips, to her toes. She felt that she had become two people. One looked upon these fleshly contortions with astonishment. The other sought submission to an enormous pain spreading in her chest. The tears flowed freely from her eyes now, and the Astonished One within her demanded querulously: "Who cries? Who is it that cries? Who is crying now?"
    But nothing stopped the tears, and she felt the painfulness which flamed through her breast as it moved her flesh and hurled her onto the bed.
    Still something demanded out of that profound astonishment: "Who cries? Who is that . . ."

= = = = = =

By these acts Leto II removed himself from the evolutionary succession. He did it with a deliberate cutting action, saying: "To be independent is to be removed." Both twins saw beyond the needs of memory as a measuring process, that is, a way of determining their distance from their human origins. But it was left to Leto II to do the audacious thing, recognizing that a real creation is independent of its creator. He refused to reenact the evolutionary sequence, saying, "That, too, takes me farther and farther from humanity." He saw the implications in this: that there can be no truly closed systems in life.
-The Holy Metamorphosis, by Harq al-Ada

    There were birds thriving on the insect life which teemed in the damp sand beyond the broken qanat: parrots, magpies, jays. This had been a djedida, the last of the new towns, built on a foundation of exposed basalt. It was abandoned now. Ghanima, using the morning hours to study the area beyond the original plantings of the abandoned sietch, detected movement and saw a banded gecko lizard. There'd been a gila woodpecker earlier, nesting in a mud wall of the djedida.
    She thought of it as a sietch, but it was really a collection of low walls made of stabilized mud brick surrounded by plantings to hold back the dunes. It lay within the Tanzerouft, six hundred kilometers south of Sihaya Ridge. Without human hands to maintain it, the sietch already was beginning to melt back into the desert, its walls eroded by sandblast winds, its plants dying, its plantation area cracked by the burning sun.
    Yet the sand beyond the shattered qanat remained damp, attesting to the fact that the squat bulk of the windtrap still functioned.
    In the months since their flight from Tabr the fugitives had sampled the protection of several such places made uninhabitable by the Desert Demon. Ghanima didn't believe in the Desert Demon, although there was no denying the visible evidence of the qanat's destruction.
    Occasionally they had word from the northern settlements through encounters with rebel spice-hunters. A few 'thopters -- some said no more than six -- carried out search flights seeking Stilgar, but Arrakis was large and its desert was friendly to the fugitives. Reportedly there was a search-and-destroy force charged with finding Stilgar's band, but the force which was led by the former Tabrite Buer Agarves had other duties and often returned to Arrakeen.
    The rebels said there was little fighting between their men and the troops of Alia. Random depredations of the Desert Demon made Home Guard duty the first concern of Alia and the Naibs. Even the smugglers had been hit, but they were said to be scouring the desert for Stilgar, wanting the price on his head.
    Stilgar had brought his band into the djedida just before dark the previous day, following the unerring moisture sense of his old Fremen nose. He'd promised they would head south for the palmyries soon, but refused to put a date on the move. Although he carried a price on his head which once would have bought a planet, Stilgar seemed the happiest and most carefree of men.
    "This is a good place for us," he'd said, pointing out that the windtrap still functioned. "Our friends have left us some water." 
    They were a small band now, sixty people in all. The old, the sick, and the very young had been filtered south into the palmyries, absorbed there by trusted families. Only the toughest remained, and they had many friends to the north and the south.
    Ghanima wondered why Stilgar refused to discuss what was happening to the planet. Couldn't he see it? As qanats were shattered, Fremen pulled back to the northern and southern lines which once had marked the extent of their holdings. This movement could only signal what must be happening to the Empire. One condition was the mirror of the other.
    Ghanima ran a hand under the collar of her stillsuit and resealed it. Despite her worries she felt remarkably free here. The inner lives no longer plagued her, although she sometimes felt their memories inserted into her consciousness. She knew from those memories what this desert had been once, before the work of the ecological transformation. It had been drier, for one thing. That unrepaired windtrap still functioned because it processed moist air.
    Many creatures which once had shunned this desert ventured to live here now. Many in the band remarked how the daylight owls proliferated. Even now, Ghanima could see antbirds. They jigged and danced alone the insect lines which swarmed in the damp sand at the end of the shattered qanat! Few badgers were to be seen out here, but there were kangaroo mice in uncounted numbers.
    Superstitious fear ruled the new Fremen, and Stilgar was no better than the rest. This djedida had been given back to the desert after its qanat had been shattered a fifth time in eleven months. Four times they'd repaired the ravages of the Desert Demon, then they'd no longer had the surplus water to risk another loss.
    It was the same all through the djedidas and in many of the old sietches. Eight out of nine new settlements had been abandoned. Many of the old sietch communities were more crowded than they had ever been before. And while the desert entered this new phase, Fremen reverted to their old ways. They saw omens in everything. Were worms increasingly scarce except in the Tanzerouft? It was the judgment of Shai-Hulud! And dead worms had been seen with nothing to say why they died. They went back to desert dust swiftly after death, but those crumbling hulks which Fremen chanced upon filled the observers with terror.
    Stilgar's band had encountered such a hulk the previous month and it had taken four days for them to shake off the feeling of evil. The thing had reeked of sour and poisonous putrefaction. Its moldering hulk had been found sitting on top of a giant spiceblow, the spice mostly ruined.
    Ghanima turned from observing the qanat and looked back at the djedida. Directly in front of her lay a broken wall which once had protected a mushtamal, a small garden annex. She'd explored the place with a firm dependence upon her own curiosity and had found a store of flat, unleavened spicebread in a stone box.
    Stilgar had destroyed it, saying: "Fremen would never leave good food behind them."
    Ghanima had suspected he was mistaken, but it hadn't been worth the argument or the risk. Fremen were changing. Once they'd moved freely across the bled, drawn by natural needs: water, spice, trade. Animal activities had been their alarm clocks. But animals moved to strange new rhythms now while most Fremen huddled close in their old cave-warrens within the shadow of the northern Shield Wall. Spice-hunters in the Tanzerouft were rare, and only Stilgar's band moved in the old ways.
    She trusted Stilgar and his fear of Alia. Irulan reinforced his arguments now, reverting to odd Bene Gesserit musings. But on faraway Salusa, Farad'n still lived. Someday there would have to be a reckoning.
    Ghanima looked up at the grey-silver morning sky, questing in her mind. Where was help to be found? Where was there someone to listen when she revealed what she saw happening all around them? The Lady Jessica stayed on Salusa, if the reports were to be believed. And Alia was a creature on a pedestal, involved only in being colossal while she drifted farther and farther from reality. Gurney Halleck was nowhere to be found, although he was reported seen everywhere. The Preacher had gone into hiding, his heretical rantings only a fading memory. 
    And Stilgar.
    She looked across the broken wall to where Stilgar was helping repair the cistern. Stilgar reveled in his role as the will-o'-the-desert, the price upon his head growing monthly. 
    Nothing made sense anymore. Nothing.
    Who was this Desert Demon, this creature able to destroy qanats as though they were false idols to be toppled into the sand? Was it a rogue worm? Was it a third force in rebellion -- many people? No one believed it was a worm. The water would kill any worm venturing against a qanat. Many Fremen believed the Desert Demon was actually a revolutionary band bent on overthrowing Alia's Mahdinate and restoring Arrakis to its old ways. Those who believed this said it would be a good thing. Get rid of that greedy apostolic succession which did little else than uphold its own mediocrity. Get back to the true religion which Muad'Dib had espoused.
    A deep sigh shook Ghanima. Oh, Leto, she thought. I'm almost glad you didn't live to see these days. I'd join you myself, but I've a knife yet unblooded. Alia and Farad'n. Farad'n and Alia. The Old Baron's her demon, and that can't be permitted.
    Harah came out of the djedida, approaching Ghanima with a steady sand-swallowing pace. Harah stopped in front of Ghanima, demanded, "What do you alone out here?" 
    "This is a strange place, Harah. We should leave." 
    "Stilgar waits to meet someone here." 
    "Oh? He didn't tell me that."
    "Why should he tell you everything? Maku?" Harah slapped the water pouch which bulged the front of Ghanima's robe. "Are you a grown woman to be pregnant?"
    "I've been pregnant so many times there's no counting them," Ghanima said. "Don't play those adult-child games with me!" 
    Harah took a backward step at the venom in Ghanima's voice. 
    "You're a band of stupids," Ghanima said, waving her hand to encompass the djedida and the activities of Stilgar and his people. "I should never have come with you." 
    "You'd be dead by now if you hadn't."
    "Perhaps. But you don't see what's right in front of your faces! Who is it that Stilgar waits to meet here?" 
    "Buer Agarves." 
    Ghanima stared at her.
    "He is being brought here secretly by friends from Red Chasm Sietch," Harah explained. 
    "Alia's little plaything?" 
    "He is being brought under blindfold." 
    "Does Stilgar believe that?" 
    "Buer asked for the parley. He agreed to all of our terms." 
    "Why wasn't I told about this?" 
    "Stilgar knew you would argue against it." 
    "Argue against . . . This is madness!" 
    Harah scowled. "Don't forget that Buer is . . ." 
    "He's Family!" Ghanima snapped. "He's the grandson of Stilgar's cousin. I know. And the Farad'n whose blood I'll draw one day is as close a relative to me. Do you think that'll stay my knife?" 
    "We've had a distrans. No one follows his party." 
    Ghanima spoke in a low voice: "Nothing good will come of this, Harah. We should leave at once."
    "Have you read an omen?" Harah asked. "That dead worm we saw! Was that --"
    "Stuff that into your womb and give birth to it elsewhere!" Ghanima raged. "I don't like this meeting nor this place. Isn't that enough?" 
    "I'll tell Stilgar what you --"
    "I'll tell him myself!" Ghanima strode past Harah, who made the sign of the worm horns at her back to ward off evil.
    But Stilgar only laughed at Ghanima's fears and ordered her to look for sandtrout as though she were one of the children. She fled into one of the djedida's abandoned houses and crouched in a corner to nurse her anger. The emotion passed quickly, though; she felt the stirring of the inner lives and remembered someone saying: "If we can immobilize them, things will go as we plan." 
    What an odd thought.
    But she couldn't recall who'd said those words.

= = = = = =

Muad'Dib was disinherited and he spoke for the disinherited of all time. He cried out against that profound injustice which alienates the individual from that which he was taught to believe, from that which seemed to come to him as a right.
-The Mahdinate, An Analysis by Harq al-Ada

    Gurney Halleck sat on the butte at Shuloch with his baliset beside him on a spice-fiber rug. Below him the enclosed basin swarmed with workers planting crops. The sand ramp up which the Cast Out had lured worms on a spice trail had been blocked off with a new qanat. Plantings moved down the slope to hold it.
    It was almost time for the noon meal and Halleck had been on the butte for more than an hour, seeking privacy in which to think. Humans did the labor below him, but everything he saw was the work of melange. Leto's personal estimate was that spice production would fall soon to a stabilized one-tenth of its peak in the Harkonnen years. Stockpiles throughout the empire doubled in value at every new posting. Three hundred and twenty-one liters were said to have bought half of Novebruns Planet from the Metulli Family.
    The Cast Out worked like men driven by a devil, and perhaps they were. Before every meal, they faced the Tanzerouft and prayed to Shai-Hulud personified. That was how they saw Leto and, through their eyes, Halleck saw a future where most of humankind shared that view. Halleck wasn't sure he liked the prospect.
    Leto had set the pattern when he'd brought Halleck and The Preacher here in Halleck's stolen 'thopter. With his bare hands Leto had breached the Shuloch qanat, hurling large stones more than fifty meters. When the Cast Out had tried to intervene, Leto had decapitated the first to reach him, using no more than a blurred sweep of his arm. He'd hurled others back into their companions and had laughed at their weapons. In a demon-voice he'd roared at them: "Fire will not touch me! Your knives will not harm me! I wear the skin of Shai-Hulud!"
    The Cast Out had recognized him then and recalled his escape, leaping from the butte "directly to the desert." They'd prostrated themselves before him and Leto had issued his orders. "I bring you two guests. You will guard them and honor them. You will rebuild your qanat and begin planting an oasis garden. One day I'll make my home here. You will prepare my home. You will sell no more spice, but you will store every bit you collect."
    On and on he'd gone with his instructions, and the Cast Out had heard every word, seeing him through fear-glazed eyes, through a terrifying awe.
    Here was Shai-Hulud come up from the sand at last!
    There'd been no intimation of this metamorphosis when Leto had found Halleck with Ghadhean al-Fali in one of the small rebel sietches at Gare Ruden. With his blind companion, Leto had come up from the desert along the old spice route, traveling by worm through an area where worms were now a rarity. He'd spoken of several detours forced upon him by the presence of moisture in the sand, enough water to poison a worm. They'd arrived shortly after noon and had been brought into the stone-walled common room by guards.
    The memory haunted Halleck now. 
    "So this is The Preacher," he'd said.
    Striding around the blind man, studying him, Halleck recalled the stories about him. No stillsuit mask hid the old face in sietch, and the features were there for memory to make its comparisons. Yes, the man did look like the old Duke for whom Leto had been named. Was it a chance likeness?
    "You know the stories about this one?" Halleck asked, speaking in an aside to Leto. "That he's your father come back from the desert?" 
    "I've heard the stories."
    Halleck turned to examine the boy. Leto wore an odd stillsuit with rolled edges around his face and ears. A black robe covered it and sandboots sheathed his feet. There was much to be explained about his presence here -- how he'd managed to escape once more.
    "Why do you bring The Preacher here?" Halleck asked. "In Jacurutu they said he works for them." 
    "No more. I bring him because Alia wants him dead." 
    "So? You think this is a sanctuary?" 
    "You are his sanctuary."
    All this time The Preacher stood near them, listening but giving no sign that he cared which turn their discussion took.
    "He has served me well, Gurney," Leto said. "House Atreides has not lost all sense of obligation to those who serve us." 
    "House Atreides?" 
    "I am House Atreides."
    "You fled Jacurutu before I could complete the testing which your grandmother ordered," Halleck said, his voice cold. "How can you assume --"
    "This man's life is to be guarded as though it were your own." Leto spoke as though there were no argument and he met Halleck's stare without flinching.
    Jessica had trained Halleck in many of the Bene Gesserit refinements of observation and he'd detected nothing in Leto which spoke of other than calm assurance. Jessica's orders remained, though. "Your grandmother charged me to complete your education and be sure you're not possessed." 
    "I'm not possessed." Just a flat statement. 
    "Why did you run away?"
    "Namri had orders to kill me no matter what I did. His orders were from Alia." 
    "Are you a Truthsayer, then?" 
    "I am." Another flat statement filled with self-assurance. 
    "And Ghanima as well?" 
    "No."
    The Preacher broke his silence then, turning his blind sockets toward Halleck but pointing at Leto. "You think you can test him?"
    "Don't interfere when you know nothing of the problem or its consequences," Halleck ordered, not looking at the man.
    "Oh, I know its consequences well enough," The Preacher said. "I was tested once by an old woman who thought she knew what she was doing. She didn't know, as it turned out." 
    Halleck looked at him then. "You're another Truthsayer?" 
    "Anyone can be a Truthsayer, even you," The Preacher said. "It's a matter of self-honesty about the nature of your own feelings. It requires that you have an inner agreement with truth which allows ready recognition."
    "Why do you interfere?" Halleck asked, putting hand to crysknife. Who was this Preacher?
    "I'm responsive to these events," The Preacher said. "My mother could put her own blood upon the altar, but I have other motives. And I do see your problem." 
    "Oh?" Halleck was actually curious now.
    "The Lady Jessica ordered you to differentiate between the wolf and the dog, between ze'eb and ke'leb. By her definition a wolf is someone with power who misuses that power. However, between wolf and dog there is a dawn period when you cannot distinguish between them."
    "That's close to the mark," Halleck said, noting how more and more people of the sietch had entered the common room to listen. "How do you know this?"
    "Because I know this planet. You don't understand? Think how it is. Beneath the surface there are rocks, dirt, sediment, sand. That's the planet's memory, the picture of its history. It's the same with humans. The dog remembers the wolf. Each universe revolves around a core of being, and outward from that core go all of the memories, right out to the surface."
    "Very interesting," Halleck said. "How does that help me carry out my orders?"
    "Review the picture of your history which is within you. Communicate as animals would communicate."
    Halleck shook his head. There was a compelling directness about this Preacher, a quality which he'd recognized many times in the Atreides, and there was more than a little hint that the man was employing the powers of Voice. Halleck felt his heart begin to hammer. Was it possible?
    "Jessica wanted an ultimate test, a stress by which the underlying fabric of her grandson exposed itself," The Preacher said. "But the fabric's always there, open to your gaze." 
    Halleck turned to stare at Leto. The movement came of itself, compelled by irresistible forces.
    The Preacher continued as though lecturing an obstinate pupil. "This young person confuses you because he's not a singular being. He's a community. As with any community under stress, any member of that community may assume command. This command isn't always benign, and we get our stories of Abomination. But you've already wounded this community enough, Gurney Halleck. Can't you see that the transformation already has taken place? This youth has achieved an inner cooperation which is enormously powerful, that cannot be subverted. Without eyes I see this. Once I opposed him, but now I do his bidding. He is the Healer." 
    "Who are you?" Halleck demanded.
    "I'm no more than what you see. Don't look at me, look at this person you were ordered to teach and test. He has been formed by crisis. He survived a lethal environment. He is here."
    "Who are you?" Halleck insisted.
    "I tell you only to look at this Atreides youth! He is the ultimate feedback upon which our species depends. He'll reinsert into the system the results of its past performance. No other human could know that past performance as he knows it. And you consider destroying such a one!" 
    "I was ordered to test him and I've not --" 
    "But you have!" 
    "Is he Abomination?"
    A weary laugh shook The Preacher. "You persist in Bene Gesserit nonsense. How they create the myths by which men sleep!" 
    "Are you Paul Atreides?" Halleck asked.
    "Paul Atreides is no more. He tried to stand as a supreme moral symbol while he renounced all moral pretensions. He became a saint without a god, every word a blasphemy. How can you think --" 
    "Because you speak with his voice." 
    "Would you test me, now? Beware, Gurney Halleck." 
    Halleck swallowed, forced his attention back to the impassive Leto who still stood calmly observant. "Who's being tested?" The Preacher asked. "Is it, perhaps, that the Lady Jessica tests you, Gurney Halleck?"
    Halleck found this thought deeply disturbing, wondering why he let this Preacher's words move him. But it was a deep thing in Atreides servants to obey that autocratic mystique. Jessica, explaining this, had made it even more mysterious. Halleck now felt something changing within himself, a something whose edges had only been touched by the Bene Gesserit training Jessica had pressed upon him. Inarticulate fury arose in him. He did not want to change!
    "Which of you plays God and to what end?" The Preacher asked. "You cannot rely on reason alone to answer that question." 
    Slowly, deliberately, Halleck raised his attention from Leto to the blind man. Jessica kept saying he should achieve the balance of kairits -- "thou shalt-thou shalt not." She called it a discipline without words and phrases, no rules or arguments. It was the sharpened edge of his own internal truth, all-engrossing. Something in the blind man's voice, his tone, his manner, ignited a fury which burned itself into blinding calmness within Halleck. 
    "Answer my question," The Preacher said.
    Halleck felt the words deepen his concentration upon this place, this one moment and its demands. His position in the universe was defined only by his concentration. No doubt remained in him. This was Paul Atreides, not dead, but returned. And this non-child, Leto. Halleck looked once more at Leto, really saw him. He saw the signs of stress around the eyes, the sense of balance in the stance, the passive mouth with its quirking sense of humor. Leto stood out from his background as though at the focus of a blinding light. He had achieved harmony simply by accepting it. 
    "Tell me, Paul," Halleck said. "Does your mother know?" 
    The Preacher sighed. "To the Sisterhood, all achieved harmony simply by accepting it."
    "Tell me, Paul," Halleck said. "Does your mother know?" 
    The Preacher sighed. "To the Sisterhood, all of it, I am dead. Do not try to revive me."
    Still not looking at him, Halleck asked: "But why does she --"
    "She does what she must. She makes her own life, thinking she rules many lives. Thus we all play god."
    "But you're alive," Halleck whispered, overcome now by his realization, turning at last to stare at this man, younger than himself, but so aged by the desert that he appeared to carry twice Halleck's years.
    "What is that?" Paul demanded. "Alive?"
    Halleck peered around them at the watching Fremen, their faces caught between doubt and awe.
    "My mother never had to learn my lesson." It was Paul's voice! "To be a god can ultimately become boring and degrading. There'd be reason enough for the invention of free will! A god might wish to escape into sleep and be alive only in the unconscious projections of his dream-creatures." 
    "But you're alive!" Halleck spoke louder now.
    Paul ignored the excitement in his old companion's voice, asked: "Would you really have pitted this lad against his sister in the test-Mashhad? What deadly nonsense! Each would have said: 'No! Kill me! Let the other live!' Where would such a test lead? What is it then to be alive, Gurney?"
    "That was not the test," Halleck protested. He did not like the way the Fremen pressed closer around them, studying Paul, ignoring Leto.
    But Leto intruded now. "Look at the fabric, father." 
    "Yes . . . yes . . . "Paul held his head high as though sniffing the air. "It's Farad'n, then!"
    "How easy it is to follow our thoughts instead of our senses," Leto said.
    Halleck had been unable to follow this thought and, about to ask, was interrupted by Leto's hand upon his arm. "Don't ask, Gurney. You might return to suspecting that I'm Abomination. No! Let it happen, Gurney. If you try to force it, you'll only destroy yourself."
    But Halleck felt himself overcome by doubts. Jessica had warned him. "They can be very beguiling, these pre-born. They have tricks you've never even dreamed." Halleck shook his head slowly. And Paul! Gods below! Paul alive and in league with this question mark he'd fathered!
    The Fremen around them could no longer be held back. They pressed between Halleck and Paul, between Leto and Paul, shoving the two to the background. The air was showered with hoarse questions. "Are you Muad'Dib? Are you truly Muad'Dib? Is it true, what he says? Tell us!"
    "You must think of me only as The Preacher," Paul said, pushing against them. "I cannot be Paul Atreides or Muad'Dib, never again. I'm not Chani's mate or Emperor."
    Halleck, fearing what might happen if these frustrated questions found no logical answer, was about to act when Leto moved ahead of him. It was there Halleck first saw an element of the terrible change which had been wrought in Leto. A bull voice roared, "Stand aside!" -- and Leto moved forward, thrusting adult Fremen right and left, knocking them down, clubbing them with his hands, wrenching knives from their hands by grasping the blades.
    In less than a minute those Fremen still standing were pressed back against the walls in silent consternation. Leto stood beside his father. "When Shai-Hulud speaks, you obey," Leto said.
    And when a few of the Fremen had started to argue, Leto had torn a corner of rock from the passage wall beside the room's exit and crumbled it in his bare hands, smiling all the while. 
    "I will tear your sietch down around your faces," he said. 
    "The Desert Demon," someone whispered.
    "And your qanats," Leto agreed. "I will rip them apart. We have not been here, do you hear me?" 
    Heads shook from side to side in terrified submission.
    "No one here has seen us," Leto said. "One whisper from you and I will return to drive you into the desert without water." 
    Halleck saw hands being raised in the warding gesture, the sign of the worm.
    "We will go now, my father and I, accompanied by our old friend," Leto said. "Make our 'thopter ready."
    And Leto had guided them to Shuloch then, explaining enroute that they must move swiftly because "Farad'n will be here on Arrakis very soon. And, as my father has said, then you'll see the real test, Gurney."
    Looking down from the Shuloch butte, Halleck asked himself once more, as he asked every day: "What test? What does he mean?"
    But Leto was no longer in Shuloch, and Paul refused to answer.

= = = = = =

Church and State, scientific reason and faith, the individual and his community, even progress and tradition -- all of these can be reconciled in the teachings of Muad'Dib. He taught us that there exist no intransigent opposites except in the beliefs of men. Anyone can rip aside the veil of Time. You can discover the future in the past or in your own imagination. Doing this, you win back your consciousness in your inner being. You know then that the universe is a coherent whole and you are indivisible from it.
-The Preacher at Arrakeen, After Harq al-Ada

    Ghanima sat far back outside the circle of light from the spice lamps and watched this Buer Agarves. She didn't like his round face and agitated eyebrows, his way of moving his feet when he spoke, as though his words were a hidden music to which he danced.
    He's not here to parley with Stil, Ghanima told herself, seeing this confirmed in every word and movement from this man. She moved farther back away from the Council circle.
    Every sietch had a room such as this one, but the meeting hall of the abandoned djedida struck Ghanima as a cramped place because it was so low. Sixty people from Stilgar's band plus the nine who'd come with Agarves filled only one end of the hall. Spice-oil lamps reflected against low beams which supported the ceiling. The light cast wavering shadows which danced on the walls, and the pungent smoke filled the place with the smell of cinnamon.
    The meeting had started at dusk after the moisture prayers and evening meal. It had been going on for more than an hour now, and Ghanima couldn't fathom the hidden currents in Agarves's performance. His words appeared clear enough, but his motions and eye movements didn't agree.
    Agarves was speaking now, responding to a question from one of Stilgar's lieutenants, a niece of Harah's named Rajia. She was a darkly ascetic young woman whose mouth turned down at the corners, giving her an air of perpetual distrust. Ghanima found the expression satisfying in the circumstances.
    "Certainly I believe Alia will grant a full and complete pardon to all of you," Agarves said. "I'd not be here with this message otherwise."
    Stilgar intervened as Rajia made to speak once more. "I'm not so much worried about our trusting her as I am about whether she trusts you." Stilgar's voice carried growling undertones. He was uncomfortable with this suggestion that he return to his old status.
    "It doesn't matter whether she trusts me," Agarves said. "To be candid about it, I don't believe she does. I've been too long searching for you without finding you. But I've always felt she didn't really want you captured. She was --"
    "She was the wife of the man I slew," Stilgar said. "I grant you that he asked for it. Might just as well've fallen on his own knife. But this new attitude smells of --"
    Agarves danced to his feet, anger plain on his face. "She forgives you! How many times must I say it? She had the Priests make a great show of asking divine guidance from --" 
    "You've only raised another issue." It was Irulan, leaning forward past Rajia, blonde head set off against Rajia's darkness. "She has convinced you, but she may have other plans." 
    "The Priesthood has --"
    "But there are all of these stories," Irulan said. "That you're more than just a military advisor, that you're her --" 
    "Enough!" Agarves was beside himself with rage. His hand hovered near his knife. Warring emotions moved just below the surface of his skin, twisting his features. "Believe what you will, but I cannot go on with that woman! She fouls me! She dirties everything she touches! I am used. I am soiled. But I have not lifted my knife against my kin. Now -- no more!"
    Ghanima, observing this, thought: That, at least, was truth coming out of him.
    Surprisingly, Stilgar broke into laughter. "Ahhhh, cousin," he said. "Forgive me, but there's truth in anger." 
    "Then you agree?"
    "I've not said that." he raised a hand as Agarves threatened another outburst. "It's not for my sake, Buer, but there are these others." He gestured around him. "They are my responsibility. Let us consider for a moment what reparations Alia offers." 
    "Reparations? There's no word of reparations. Pardon, but no --" 
    "Then what does she offer as surety of her word?" 
    "Sietch Tabr and you as Naib, full autonomy as a neutral. She understands now how --"
    "I'll not go back to her entourage or provide her with fighting men," Stilgar warned. "Is that understood?"
    Ghanima could hear Stilgar beginning to weaken and thought: No, Stil! No!
    "No need for that," Agarves said. "Alia wants only Ghanima returned to her and the carrying out of the betrothal promise which she --"
    "So now it comes out!" Stilgar said, his brows drawing down. "Ghanima's the price of my pardon. Does she think me --" 
    "She thinks you sensible," Agarves argued, resuming his seat.
    Gleefully, Ghanima thought: He won't do it. Save your breath. He won't do it.
    As she thought this, Ghanima heard a soft rustling behind and to her left. She started to turn, felt powerful hands grab her. A heavy rag reeking of sleep-drugs covered her face before she could cry out. As consciousness faded, she felt herself being carried toward a door in the hall's darkest reaches. And she thought: I should have guessed! I should've been prepared! But the hands that held her were adult and strong. She could not squirm away from them.
    Ghanima's last sensory impressions were of cold air, a glimpse of stars, and a hooded face which looked down at her, then asked: "She wasn't injured, was she?"
    The answer was lost as the stars wheeled and streaked across her gaze, losing themselves in a blaze of light which was the inner core of her selfdom.

= = = = = =

Muad'Dib gave us a particular kind of knowledge about prophetic insight, about the behavior which surrounds such insight and its influence upon events which are seen to be "on line." (That is, events which are set to occur in a related system which the prophet reveals and interprets.) As has been noted elsewhere, such insight operates as a peculiar trap for the prophet himself. He can become the victim of what he knows -- which is a relatively common human failing. The danger is that those who predict real events may overtook the polarizing effect brought about by overindulgence in their own truth. They tend to forget that nothing in a polarized universe can exist without its opposite being present.
-The Prescient Vision, by Harq al-Ada

    Blowing sand hung like fog on the horizon, obscuring the rising sun. The sand was cold in the dune shadows. Leto stood outside the ring of the palmyrie looking into the desert. He smelled dust and the aroma of spiny plants, heard the morning sounds of people and animals. The Fremen maintained no qanat in this place. They had only a bare minimum of hand planting irrigated by the women, who carried water in skin bags. Their windtrap was a fragile thing, easily destroyed by the stormwinds but easily rebuilt. Hardship, the rigors of the spice trade, and adventure were a way of life here. These Fremen still believed heaven was the sound of running water, but they cherished an ancient concept of Freedom which Leto shared. 
    Freedom is a lonely state, he thought.
    Leto adjusted the folds of the white robe which covered his living stillsuit. He could feel how the sandtrout membrane had changed him and, as always with this feeling, he was forced to overcome a deep sense of loss. He no longer was completely human. Odd things swam in his blood. Sandtrout cilia had penetrated every organ, adjusting, changing. The sandtrout itself was changing, adapting. But Leto, knowing this, felt himself torn by the old threads of his lost humanity, his life caught in primal anguish with its ancient continuity shattered. He knew the trap of indulging in such emotion, though. He knew it well.
    Let the future happen of itself, he thought. The only rule governing creativity is the act of creation itself.
    It was difficult to take his gaze away from the sands, the dunes -- the great emptiness. Here at the edge of the sand lay a few rocks, but they led the imagination outward into the winds, the dust, the sparse and lonely plants and animals, dune merging into dune, desert into desert.
    Behind him came the sound of a flute playing for the morning prayer, the chant for moisture which now was a subtly altered serenade to the new Shai-Hulud. This knowledge in Leto's mind gave the music a sense of eternal loneliness. 
    I could just walk away into that desert, he thought.
    Everything would change then. One direction would be as good as another. He had already learned to live a life free of possessions. He had refined the Fremen mystique to a terrible edge: everything he took with him was necessary, and that was all he took. But he carried nothing except the robe on his back, the Atreides hawk ring hidden in its folds, and the skin-which-was-not-his-own. 
    It would be easy to walk away from here.
    Movement high in the sky caught his attention: the splayed-gap wingtips identified a vulture. The sight filled his chest with aching. Like the wild Fremen, vultures lived in this land because this was where they were born. They knew nothing better. The desert made them what they were.
    Another Fremen breed was coming up in the wake of Muad'Dib and Alia, though. They were the reason he could not let himself walk away into the desert as his father had done. Leto recalled Idaho's words from the early days: "These Fremen! They're magnificently alive. I've never met a greedy Fremen." 
    There were plenty of greedy Fremen now.
    A wave of sadness passed over Leto. He was committed to a course which could change all of that, but at a terrible price. And the management of that course became increasingly difficult as they neared the vortex.
    Kralizec, the Typhoon Struggle, lay ahead . . . but Kralizec or worse would be the price of a misstep.
    Voices sounded behind Leto, then the clear piping sound of a child speaking: "Here he is." 
    Leto turned.
    The Preacher had come out of the palmyrie, led by a child. 
    Why do I still think of him as The Preacher? Leto wondered.
    The answer lay there on the clean tablet of Leto's mind: Because this is no longer Muad'Dib, no longer Paul Atreides. The desert had made him what he was. The desert and the jackals of Jacurutu with their overdoses of melange and their constant betrayals. The Preacher was old before his time, old not despite the spice but because of it.
    "They said you wanted to see me now," The Preacher said, speaking as his child guide stopped.
    Leto looked at the child of the palmyrie, a person almost as tall as himself, with awe tempered by an avaricious curiosity. The young eyes glinted darkly above the child-sized stillsuit mask. 
    Leto waved a hand. "Leave us."
    For a moment there was rebellion in the child's shoulders, then the awe and native Fremen respect for privacy took over. The child left them.
    "You know Farad'n is here on Arrakis?" Leto asked. 
    "Gurney told me when he flew me down last night." 
    And The Preacher thought: How coldly measured his words are. He's like I was in the old days. 
    "I face a difficult choice," Leto said. 
    "I thought you'd already made all the choices." 
    "We know that trap, father."
    The Preacher cleared his throat. The tensions told him how near they were to the shattering crisis. Now Leto would not be relying on pure vision, but on vision management. 
    "You need my help?" The Preacher asked.
    "Yes. I'm returning to Arrakeen and I wish to go as your guide." 
    "To what end?" 
    "Would you preach once more in Arrakeen?" 
    "Perhaps. There are things I've not said to them." 
    "You will not come back to the desert, father." 
    "If I go with you?" 
    "Yes." 
    "I'll do whatever you decide."
    "Have you considered? With Farad'n there, your mother will be with him." 
    "Undoubtedly."
    Once more, The Preacher cleared his throat. It was a betrayal of nervousness which Muad'Dib would never have permitted. This flesh had been too long away from the old regimen of self-discipline, his mind too often betrayed into madness by the Jacurutu. And The Preacher thought that perhaps it wouldn't be wise to return to Arrakeen.
    "You don't have to go back there with me," Leto said. "But my sister is there and I must return. You could go with Gurney." 
    "And you'd go to Arrakeen alone?" 
    "Yes. I must meet Farad'n." 
    "I will go with you," The Preacher sighed.
    And Leto sensed a touch of the old vision madness in The Preacher's manner, wondered: Has he been playing the prescience game? No. He'd never go that way again. He knew the trap of a partial commitment. The Preacher's every word confirmed that he had handed over the visions to his son, knowing that everything in this universe had been anticipated.
    It was the old polarities which taunted The Preacher now. He had fled from paradox into paradox.
    "We'll be leaving in a few minutes, then," Leto said. "Will you tell Gurney?" 
    "Gurney's not going with us?" 
    "I want Gurney to survive."
    The Preacher opened himself to the tensions then. They were in the air around him, in the ground under his feet, a motile thing which focused onto the non-child who was his son. The blunt scream of his old visions waited in The Preacher's throat. 
    This cursed holiness!
    The sandy juice of his fears could not be avoided. He knew what faced them in Arrakeen. They would play a game once more with terrifying and deadly forces which could never bring them peace.

= = = = = = 

The child who refuses to travel in the father's harness, this is the symbol of man's most unique capability. "I do not have to be what my father was. I do not have to obey my father's rules or even believe everything he believed. It is my strength as a human that I can make my own choices of what to believe and what not to believe, of what to be and what not to be."
-Leto Atreides II, The Harq al-Ada Biography

    Pilgrim women were dancing to drum and flute in the Temple plaza, no coverings on their heads, bangles at their necks, their dresses thin and revealing. Their long black hair was thrown straight out, then straggled across their faces as they whirled.
    Alia looked down at the scene from her Temple aerie, both attracted and repelled. It was mid-morning, the hour when the aroma of spice-coffee began to waft across the plaza from the vendors beneath the shaded arches. Soon she would have to go out and greet Farad'n, present the formal gifts and supervise his first meeting with Ghanima.
    It was all working out according to plan. Ghani would kill him and, in the shattering aftermath, only one person would be prepared to pick up the pieces. The puppets danced when the strings were pulled. Stilgar had killed Agarves just as she'd hoped. And Agarves had led the kidnappers to the djedida without knowing it, a secret signal transmitter hidden in the new boots she'd given him. Now Stilgar and Irulan waited in the Temple dungeons. Perhaps they would die, but there might be other uses for them. There was no harm in waiting.
    She noted that town Fremen were watching the pilgrim dancers below her, their eyes intense and unwavering. A basic sexual equality had come out of the desert to persist in Fremen town and city, but social differences between male and female already were making themselves felt. That, too, went according to plan. Divide and weaken. Alia could sense the subtle change in the way the two Fremen watched those off-planet women and their exotic dance. 
    Let them watch. Let them fill their minds with ghafla.
    The louvers of Alia's window had been opened and she could feel a sharp increase in the heat which began about sunrise in this season and would peak in mid-afternoon. The temperature on the stone floor of the plaza would be much higher. It would be uncomfortable for those dancers, but still they whirled and bent, swung their arms and their hair in the frenzy of their dedication. They had dedicated their dance to Alia, the Womb of Heaven. An aide had come to whisper this to Alia, sneering at the off-world women and their peculiar ways. The aide had explained that the women were from lx, where remnants of the forbidden science and technology remained.
    Alia sniffed. Those women were as ignorant, as superstitious and backward as the desert Fremen . . . just as that sneering aide had said, trying to curry favor by reporting the dedication of the dance. And neither the aide nor the Ixians even knew that Ix was merely a number in a forgotten language.
    Laughing lightly to herself, Alia thought: Let them dance. The dancing wasted energy which might be put to more destructive uses. And the music was pleasant, a thin wailing played against flat tympani from gourd drums and clapped hands.
    Abruptly the music was drowned beneath a roaring of many voices from the plaza's far side. The dancers missed a step, recovered in a brief confusion, but they had lost their sensuous singleness, and even their attention wandered to the far gate of the plaza, where a mob could be seen spreading onto the stones like water rushing through the opened valve of a qanat. 
    Alia stared at that oncoming wave.
    She heard words now, and one above all others: "Preacher! Preacher!"
    Then she saw him, striding with the first spread of the wave, one hand on the shoulder of his young guide.
    The pilgrim dancers gave up their whirling, retired to the terraced steps below Alia. They were joined by their audience, and Alia sensed awe in the watchers. Her own emotion was fear. 
    How dare he!
    She half turned to summon guards, but second thoughts stopped her. The mob already filled the plaza. They could turn ugly if thwarted in their obvious desire to hear the blind visionary. 
    Alia clenched her fists.
    The Preacher! Why was Paul doing this? To half the population he was a "desert madman" and, therefore, sacred. Others whispered in the bazaars and shops that it must be Muad'Dib. Why else did the Mahdinate let him speak such angry heresy?
    Alia could see refugees among the mob, remnants from the abandoned sietches, their robes in tatters. That would be a dangerous place down there, a place where mistakes could be made. 
    "Mistress?"
    The voice came from behind Alia. She turned, saw Zia standing in the arched doorway to the outer chamber. Armed House Guards were close behind her. 
    "Yes, Zia?" 
    "My Lady, Farad'n is out here requesting audience." 
    "Here? In my chambers?" 
    "Yes, My Lady." 
    "Is he alone?" 
    "Two bodyguards and the Lady Jessica."
    Alia put a hand to her throat, remembering her last encounter with her mother. Times had changed, though. New conditions ruled their relationship.
    "How impetuous he is," Alia said. "What reason does he give?"
    "He has heard about . . ." Zia pointed to the window over the plaza. "He says he was told you have the best vantage." 
    Alia frowned. "Do you believe this, Zia?"
    "No, My Lady. I think he has heard the rumors. He wants to watch your reaction." 
    "My mother put him up to this!" 
    "Quite possibly, My Lady."
    "Zia, my dear, I want you to carry out a specific set of very important orders for me. Come here." 
    Zia approached to within a pace. "My Lady?" 
    "Have Farad'n, his guards, and my mother admitted. Then prepare to bring Ghanima, She is to be accoutered as a Fremen bride in every detail -- complete." 
    "With knife. My Lady?" 
    "With knife." 
    "My Lady, that's --" 
    "Ghanima poses no threat to me."
    "My Lady, there's reason to believe she fled with Stilgar more to protect him than for any other --" 
    "Zia!" 
    "My Lady?"
    "Ghanima already has made her plea for Stilgar's life and Stilgar remains alive."
    "But she's the heir presumptive!"
    "Just carry out my orders. Have Ghanima prepared. While you're seeing to that, send five attendants from the Temple Priesthood out into the plaza. They're to invite The Preacher up here. Have them wait their opportunity and speak to him, nothing more. They are to use no force. I want them to issue a polite invitation. Absolutely no force. And Zia . . ." 
    "My Lady?" How sullen she sounded.
    "The Preacher and Ghanima are to be brought before me simultaneously. They are to enter together upon my signal. Do you understand?" 
    "I know the plan, My Lady, but --"
    "Just do it! Together." And Alia nodded dismissal to the amazon aide. As Zia turner and left, Alia said: "On your way out, send in Farad'n's party, but see that they're preceded by ten of your most trustworthy people."
    Zia glanced back but continued leaving the room. "It will be done as you command, My Lady."
    Alia turned away to peer out the window. In just a few minutes the plan would bear its bloody fruit. And Paul would be here when his daughter delivered the coup de grace to his holy pretensions. Alia heard Zia's guard detachment entering. It would be over soon. All over. She looked down with a swelling sense of triumph as The Preacher took his stance on the first step. His youthful guide squatted beside him. Alia saw the yellow robes of Temple Priests waiting on the left, held back by the press of the crowd. They were experienced with crowds, however. They'd find a way to approach their target. The Preacher's voice boomed out over the plaza, and the mob waited upon his words with rapt attention. Let them listen! Soon his words would be made to mean other things than he intended. And there'd be no Preacher around to protest. 
    She heard Farad'n's party enter, Jessica's voice. "Alia?" 
    Without turning Alia said: "Welcome, Prince Farad'n, mother. Come and enjoy the show." She glanced back then, saw the big Sardaukar, Tyekanik, scowling at her guards who were blocking the way. "But this isn't hospitable." Alia said. "Let them approach." Two of her guards, obviously acting on Zia's orders, came up to her and stood between her and the others. The other guards moved aside. Alia backed to the right side of the window, motioned to it. "This is truly the best vantage point." 
    Jessica, wearing her traditional black aba robe, glared at Alia, escorted Farad'n to the window, but stood between him and Alia's guards.
    "This is very kind of you, Lady Alia," Farad'n said. "I've heard so much about this Preacher."
    "And there he is in the flesh," Alia said. She saw that Farad'n wore the dress grey of a Sardaukar commander without decorations. He moved with a lean grace which Alia admired. Perhaps there would be more than idle amusement in this Corrino Prince.
    The Preacher's voice boomed into the room over the amplifier pickups beside the window. Alia felt the tremors of it in her bones, began to listen to his words with growing fascination.
    "I found myself in the Desert of Zan," The Preacher shouted, "in that waste of howling wilderness. And God commanded me to make that place clean. For we were provoked in the desert, and grieved in the desert, and we were tempted in that wilderness to forsake our ways."
    Desert of Zan, Alia thought. That was the name given to the place of the first trial of the Zensunni Wanderers from whom the Fremen sprang. But his words! Was he taking credit for the destruction wrought against the sietch strongholds of the loyal tribes?
    "Wild beasts lie upon your lands," The Preacher said, his voice booming across the plaza. "Doleful creatures fill your houses. You who fled your homes no longer multiply your days upon the sand. Yea, you who have forsaken our ways, you will die in a fouled nest if you continue on this path. But if you heed my warning, the Lord shall lead you through a land of pits into the Mountains of God. Yea, Shai-Hulud shall lead you." 
    Soft moans arose from the crowd. The Preacher paused, swinging his eyeless sockets from side to side at the sound. Then he raised his arms, spreading them wide, called out: "O God, my flesh longeth for Thy way in a dry and thirsty land!"
    An old woman in front of The Preacher, an obvious refugee by the patched and worn look of her garments, held up her hands to him, pleaded: "Help us, Muad'Dib. Help us!"
    In a sudden fearful constriction of her breast, Alia asked herself if that old woman really knew the truth. Alia glanced at her mother, but Jessica remained unmoving, dividing her attention between Alia's guards, Farad'n and the view from the window. Farad'n stood rooted in fascinated attention.
    Alia glanced out the window, trying to see her Temple Priests. They were not in view and she suspected they had worked their way around below her near the Temple doors, seeking a direct route down the steps.
    The Preacher pointed his right hand over the old woman's head, shouted: "You are the only help remaining! You were rebellious. You brought the dry wind which does not cleanse, nor does it cool. You bear the burden of our desert, and the whirlwind cometh from that place, from that terrible land. I have been in that wilderness. Water runs upon the sand from shattered qanats. Streams cross the ground. Water has fallen from the sky in the Belt of Dune! O my friends, God has commanded me. Make straight in the desert a highway for our Lord, for I am the voice that cometh to thee from the wilderness."
    He pointed to the steps beneath his feet, a stiff and quivering finger. "This is no lost djedida which is no more inhabited forever! Here have we eaten the bread of heaven. And here the noise of strangers drives us from our homes! They breed for us a desolation, a land wherein no man dwelleth, nor any man pass thereby." 
    The crowd stirred uncomfortably, refugees and town Fremen peering about, looking at the pilgrims of the Hajj who stood among them.
    He could start a bloody riot! Alia thought. Well, let him. My Priests can grab him in the confusion.
    She saw the five Priests then, a tight knot of yellow robes working down the steps behind The Preacher.
    "The waters which we spread upon the desert have become blood," The Preacher said, waving his arms wide. "Blood upon our land! Behold our desert which could rejoice and blossom; it has lured the stranger and seduced him in our midst. They come for violence! Their faces are closed up as for the last wind of Kralizec! They gather the captivity of the sand. They suck up the abundance of the sand, the treasure hidden in the depths. Behold them as they go forth to their evil work. It is written: 'And I stood upon the sand, and I saw a beast rise up out of that sand, and upon the head of that beast was the name of God!' "
    Angry mutterings arose from the crowd. Fists were raised, shaken.
    "What is he doing?" Farad'n whispered.
    "I wish I knew," Alia said. She put a hand to her breast, feeling the fearful excitement of this moment. The crowd would turn upon the pilgrims if he kept this up!
    But The Preacher half turned, aimed his dead sockets toward the Temple and raised a hand to point at the high windows of Alia's aerie, "One blasphemy remains!" he screamed. "Blasphemy! And the name of that blasphemy is Alia!" 
    Shocked silence gripped the plaza.
    Alia stood in unmoving consternation. She knew the mob could not see her, but she felt overcome by a sense of exposure, of vulnerability. The echoes of calming words within her skull competed with the pounding of her heart. She could only stare down at that incredible tableau. The Preacher remained with a hand pointing at her windows.
    His words had been too much for the Priests, though. They broke the silence with angry shouts, stormed down the steps, thrusting people aside. As they moved the crowd reacted, breaking like a wave upon the steps, sweeping over the first lines of onlookers, carrying The Preacher before them. He stumbled blindly, separated from his young guide. Then a yellow-clad arm arose from the press of people; a crysknife was brandished in its hand. She saw the knife strike downward, bury itself in The Preacher's chest.
    The thunderous clang of the Temple's giant doors being closed broke Alia from her shock. Guards obviously had closed the doors against the mob. But people already were drawing back, making an open space around a crumpled figure on the steps. An eerie quiet fell over the plaza. Alia saw many bodies, but only this one lay by itself.
    Then a voice screeched from the mob: "Muad'Dib! They've killed Muad'Dib!" 
    "Gods below," Alia quavered. "Gods below." 
    "A little late for that, don't you think?" Jessica asked.
    Alia whirled, noting the sudden startled reaction of Farad'n as he saw the rage on her face. "That was Paul they killed!" Alia screamed. "That was your son! When they confirm it, do you know what'll happen?"
    Jessica stood rooted for a long moment, thinking that she had just been told something already known to her. Farad'n's hand upon her arm shattered the moment. "My Lady," he said, and there was such compassion in his voice that Jessica thought she might die of it right there. She looked from the cold, glaring anger on Alia's face to the sympathetic misery on Farad'n's features, and thought: Perhaps I did my job too well.
    There could be no doubting Alia's words. Jessica remembered every intonation of The Preacher's voice, hearing her own tricks in it, the long years of instruction she'd spent there upon a young man meant to be Emperor, but who now lay a shattered mound of bloody rags upon the Temple steps.
    Ghafla blinded me, Jessica thought.
    Alia gestured to one of her aides, called: "Bring Ghanima now."
    Jessica forced herself into recognizing these words. Ghanima? Why Ghanima now?
    The aide had turned toward the outer door, motioning for it to be unbarred, but before a word could be uttered the door bulged. Hinges popped. The bar snapped and the door, a thick plasteel construction meant to withstand terrible energies, toppled into the room. Guards leaped to avoid it, drawing their weapons.
    Jessica and Farad'n's bodyguards closed in around the Corrino Prince.
    But the opening revealed only two children: Ghanima on the left, clad in her black betrothal robe, and Leto on the right, the grey slickness of a stillsuit beneath a desert-stained white robe.
    Alia stared from the fallen door to the children, found she was trembling uncontrollably.
    "The family here to greet us," Leto said. "Grandmother." He nodded to Jessica, shifted his attention to the Corrino Prince. "And this must be Prince Farad'n. Welcome to Arrakis, Prince." 
    Ghanima's eyes appeared empty. She held her right hand on a ceremonial crysknife at her waist, and she appeared to be trying to escape from Leto's grip on her arm. Leto shook her arm and her whole body shook with it.
    "Behold me, family," Leto said. "I am Ari, the Lion of the Atreides. And here --" Again he shook Ghanima's arm with that powerful ease which set her whole body jerking. "-- here is Aryeh, the Atreides Lioness. We come to set you onto Secher Nbiw, the Golden Path."
    Ghanima, absorbing the trigger words, Secher Nbiw, felt the locked-away consciousness flow into her mind. It flowed with a linear nicety, the inner awareness of her mother hovering there behind it, a guardian at a gate. And Ghanima knew in that instant that she had conquered the clamorous past. She possessed a gate through which she could peer when she needed that past. The months of self-hypnotic suppression had built for her a safe place from which to manage her own flesh. She started to turn toward Leto with the need to explain this when she became aware of where she stood and with whom.
    Leto released her arm.
    "Did our plan work?" Ghanima whispered. 
    "Well enough," Leto said.
    Recovering from her shock, Alia shouted at a clump of guards on her left: "Seize them!"
    But Leto bent, took the fallen door with one hand, skidded it across the room into the guards. Two were pinned against the wall. The others fell back in terror. That door weighed half a metric ton and this child had thrown it.
    Alia, growing aware that the corridor beyond the doorway contained fallen guards, realized that Leto must have dealt with them, that this child had shattered her impregnable door.
    Jessica, too, had seen the bodies, seen the awesome power in Leto and had made similar assumptions, but Ghanima's words touched a core of Bene Gesserit discipline which forced Jessica to maintain her composure. This grandchild spoke of a plan. 
    "What plan?" Jessica asked.
    "The Golden Path, our Imperial plan for our Imperium," Leto said. He nodded to Farad'n. "Don't think harshly of me, cousin. I act for you as well. Alia hoped to have Ghanima slay you. I'd rather you lived out your life in some degree of happiness." 
    Alia screamed at her guards cowering in the passage: "I command you to seize them!" 
    But the guards refused to enter the room.
    "Wait for me here, sister," Leto said. "I have a disagreeable task to perform." He moved across the room toward Alia.
    She backed away from him into a corner, crouched and drew her knife. The green jewels of its handle flashed in the light from the window.
    Leto merely continued his advance, hands empty, but spread and ready.
    Alia lunged with the knife.
    Leto leaped almost to the ceiling, struck with his left foot. It caught Alia's head a glancing blow and sent her sprawling with a bloody mark on her forehead. She lost her grip on the knife and it skidded across the floor. Alia scrambled after the knife, but found Leto standing in front of her.
    Alia hesitated, called up everything she knew of Bene Gesserit training. She came off the floor, body loose and poised. 
    Once more Leto advanced upon her.
    Alia feinted to the left but her right shoulder came up and her right foot shot out in a toe-pointing kick which could disembowel a man if it struck precisely.
    Leto caught the blow on his arm, grabbed the foot, and picked her up by it, swinging her around his head. The speed with which he swung her sent a flapping, hissing sound through the room as her robe beat against her body. 
    The others ducked away.
    Alia screamed and screamed, but still she continued to swing around and around and around. Presently she fell silent.
    Slowly Leto reduced the speed of her whirling, dropped her gently to the floor. She lay in a panting bundle.
    Leto bent over her. "I could've thrown you through a wall," he said. "Perhaps that would've been best, but we're now at the center of the struggle. You deserve your chance." 
    Alia's eyes darted wildly from side to side.
    "I have conquered those inner lives," Leto said. "Look at Ghani. She, too, can --" 
    Ghanima interrupted: "Alia, I can show you --" 
    "No!" The word was wrenched from Alia. Her chest heaved and voices began to pour from her mouth. They were disconnected, cursing, pleading. "You see! Why didn't you listen?" And again: "Why're you doing this? What's happening?" And another voice: "Stop them! Make them stop!" 
    Jessica covered her eyes, felt Farad'n's hand steady her.
    Still Alia raved: "I'll kill you!" Hideous curses erupted from her. "I'll drink your blood!" The sounds of many languages began to pour from her, all jumbled and confused.
    The huddled guards in the outer passage made the sign of the worm, then held clenched fists beside their ears. She was possessed!
    Leto stood, shaking his head. He stepped to the window and with three swift blows shattered the supposedly unbreakable crystal-reinforced glass from its frame.
    A sly look came over Alia's face. Jessica heard something like her own voice come from that twisting mouth, a parody of Bene Gesserit control. "All of you! Stay where you are!" 
    Jessica, lowering her hands, found them damp with tears. 
    Alia rolled to her knees, lurched to her feet.
    "Don't you know who I am?" she demanded. It was her old voice, the sweet and lilting voice of the youthful Alia who was no more. "Why're you all looking at me that way?" She turned pleading eyes to Jessica. "Mother, make them stop it." 
    Jessica could only shake her head from side to side, consumed by ultimate horror. All of the old Bene Gesserit warnings were true. She looked at Leto and Ghani standing side by side near Alia. What did those warnings mean for these poor twins?
    "Grandmother," Leto said, and there was pleading in his voice. "Must we have a Trial of Possession?"
    "Who are you to speak of trial?" Alia asked, and her voice was that of a querulous man, an autocratic and sensual man far gone in self-indulgence.
    Both Leto and Ghanima recognized the voice. The Old Baron Harkonnen. Ghanima heard the same voice begin to echo in her own head, but the inner gate closed and she sensed her mother standing there.
    Jessica remained silent.
    "Then the decision is mine," Leto said. "And the choice is yours, Alia. Trial of Possession, or . . ." He nodded toward the open window.
    "Who're you to give me a choice?" Alia demanded, and it was still the voice of the Old Baron.
    "Demon!" Ghanima screamed. "Let her make her own choice!"
    "Mother," Alia pleaded in her little-girl tones. "Mother, what're they doing? What do you want me to do? Help me." 
    "Help yourself," Leto ordered and, for just an instant, he saw the shattered presence of his aunt in her eyes, a glaring hopelessness which peered out at him and was gone. But her body moved, a sticklike, thrusting walk. She wavered, stumbled, veered from her path but returned to it, nearer and nearer the open window.
    Now the voice of the Old Baron raged from her lips: "Stop! Stop it, I say! I command you! Stop it! Feel this!" Alia clutched her head, stumbled closer to the window. She had the sill against her thighs then, but the voice still raved. "Don't do this! Stop it and I'll help you. I have a plan. Listen to me. Stop it, I say. Wait!" But Alia pulled her hands away from her head, clutched the broken casement. In one jerking motion, she pulled herself over the sill and was gone. Not even a screech came from her as she fell.
    In the room they heard the crowd shout, the sodden thump as Alia struck the steps far below.
    Leto looked at Jessica. "We told you to pity her." 
    Jessica turned and buried her face in Farad'n's tunic.

= = = = = =

The assumption that a whole system can be made to work better through an assault on its conscious elements betrays a dangerous ignorance. This has often been the ignorant approach of those who call themselves scientists and technologists.
-The Butlerian Jihad, by Harq al-Ada

    "He runs at night, cousin," Ghanima said. "He runs. Have you seen him run?" 
    "No," Farad'n said.
    He waited with Ghanima outside the small audience hall of the Keep where Leto had called them to attend. Tyekanik stood at one side, uncomfortable with the Lady Jessica, who appeared withdrawn, as though her mind lived in another place. It was hardly an hour past the morning meal, but already many things had been set moving -- a summons to the Guild, messages to CHOAM and the Landsraad.
    Farad'n found it difficult to understand these Atreides. The Lady Jessica had warned him, but still the reality of them puzzled him. They still talked of the betrothal, although most political reasons for it seemed to have dissolved. Leto would assume the throne; there appeared little doubt of that. His odd living skin would have to be removed, of course . . . but, in time . . .
    "He runs to tire himself," Ghanima said. "He's Kralizec embodied. No wind ever ran as he runs. He's a blur atop the dunes. I've seen him. He runs and runs. And when he has exhausted himself at last, he returns and rests his head in my lap. 'Ask our mother within to find a way for me to die,' he pleads." 
    Farad'n stared at her. In the week since the riot in the plaza, the Keep had moved to strange rhythms, mysterious comings and goings; stories of bitter fighting beyond the Shield Wall came to him through Tyekanik, whose military advice had been asked.
    "I don't understand you," Farad'n said. "Find a way for him to die?"
    "He asked me to prepare you," Ghanima said. Not for the first time, she was struck by the curious innocence of this Corrino Prince. Was that Jessica's doing, or something born in him? 
    "For what?"
    "He's no longer human," Ghanima said. "Yesterday you asked when he was going to remove the living skin? Never. It's part of him now and he's part of it. Leto estimates he has perhaps four thousand years before metamorphosis destroys him." 
    Farad'n tried to swallow in a dry throat. 
    "You see why he runs?" Ghanima asked. 
    "But if he'll live so long and be so --"
    "Because the memory of being human is so rich in him. Think of all those lives, cousin. No. You can't imagine what that is because you've no experience of it. But I know. I can imagine his pain. He gives more than anyone ever gave before. Our father walked into the desert trying to escape it. Alia became Abomination in fear of it. Our grandmother has only the blurred infancy of this condition, yet must use every Bene Gesserit wile to live with it -- which is what Reverend Mother training amounts to anyway. But Leto! He's all alone, never to be duplicated." 
    Farad'n felt stunned by her words. Emperor for four thousand years?
    "Jessica knows," Ghanima said, looking across at her grandmother. "He told her last night. He called himself the first truly long-range planner in human history." 
    "What . . . does he plan?" 
    "The Golden Path. He'll explain it to you later." 
    "And he has a role for me in this . . . plan?" 
    "As my mate," Ghanima said. "He's taking over the Sisterhood's breeding program. I'm sure my grandmother told you about the Bene Gesserit dream for a male Reverend with extraordinary powers. He's --" 
    "You mean we're just to be --"
    "Not just." She took his arm, squeezed it with a warm familiarity. "He'll have many very responsible tasks for both of us. When we're not producing children, that is."
    "Well, you're a little young yet," Farad'n said, disengaging his arm.
    "Don't ever make that mistake again," she said. There was ice in her tone.
    Jessica came up to them with Tyekanik.
    "Tyek tells me the fighting has spread off-planet," Jessica said. "The Central Temple on Biarek is under siege." 
    Farad'n thought her oddly calm in this statement. He'd reviewed the reports with Tyekanik during the night. A wildfire of rebellion was spreading through the Empire. It would be put down, of course, but Leto would have a sorry Empire to restore.
    "Here's Stilgar now," Ghanima said. "They've been waiting for him." And once more she took Farad'n's arm.
    The old Fremen Naib had entered by the far door escorted by two former Death Commando companions from the desert days. All were dressed in formal black robes with white piping and yellow headbands for mourning. They approached with steady strides, but Stilgar kept his attention on Jessica. He stopped in front of her, nodded warily.
    "You still worry about the death of Duncan Idaho," Jessica said. She didn't like this caution in her old friend. 
    "Reverend Mother," he said.
    So it's going to be that way! Jessica thought. All formal and according to the Fremen code, with blood difficult to expunge.
    She said: "By our view, you but played apart which Duncan assigned you. Not the first time a man has given his life for the Atreides. Why do they do it, Stil? You've been ready for it more than once. Why? Is it that you know how much the Atreides give in return?"
    "I'm happy you seek no excuse for revenge," he said. "But there are matters I must discuss with your grandson. These matters may separate us from you forever." 
    "You mean Tabr will not pay him homage?" Ghanima asked.
    "I mean I reserve my judgment." He looked coldly at Ghanima. "I don't like what my Fremen have become," he growled. "We will go back to the old ways. Without you if necessary."
    "For a time, perhaps," Ghanima said. "But the desert is dying, Stil. What'll you do when there are no more worms, no more desert?" 
    "I don't believe it!"
    "Within one hundred years," Ghanima said, "there'll be fewer than fifty worms, and those will be sick ones kept in a carefully managed reservation. Their spice will be for the Spacing Guild only, and the price . . ." She shook her head. "I've seen Leto's figures. He's been all over the planet. He knows." 
    "Is this another trick to keep the Fremen as your vassals?" 
    "When were you ever my vassal?" Ghanima asked.
    Stilgar scowled. No matter what he said or did, these twins always made it his fault!
    "Last night he told me about this Golden Path," Stilgar blurted. "I don't like it!"
    "That's odd," Ghanima said, glancing at her grandmother. "Most of the Empire will welcome it." 
    "Destruction of us all," Stilgar muttered.
    "But everyone longs for the Golden Age," Ghanima said. "Isn't that so, grandmother?" 
    "Everyone," Jessica agreed.
    "They long for the Pharaonic Empire which Leto will give them," Ghanima said. "They long for a rich peace with abundant harvests, plentiful trade, a leveling of all except the Golden Ruler." 
    "It'll be the death of the Fremen!" Stilgar protested.
    "How can you say that? Will we not need soldiers and brave men to remove the occasional dissatisfaction? Why, Stil, you and Tyek's brave companions will be hard pressed to do the job." 
    Stilgar looked at the Sardaukar officer and a strange light of understanding passed between them.
    "And Leto will control the spice," Jessica reminded them. 
    "He'll control it absolutely," Ghanima said.
    Farad'n, listening with the new awareness which Jessica had taught him, heard a set piece, a prepared performance between Ghanima and her grandmother.
    "Peace will endure and endure and endure," Ghanima said. "Memory of war will all but vanish. Leto will lead humankind through that garden for at least four thousand years." 
    Tyekanik glanced questioningly at Farad'n, cleared his throat. 
    "Yes, Tyek?" Farad'n said.
    "I'd speak privately with you, My Prince."
    Farad'n smiled, knowing the question in Tyekanik's military mind, knowing that at least two others present also recognized this question. "I'll not sell the Sardaukar," Farad'n said. 
    "No need," Ghanima said.
    "Do you listen to this child?" Tyekanik demanded. He was outraged. The old Naib there understood the problems being raised by all of this plotting, but nobody else knew a damned thing about the situation!
    Ghanima smiled grimly, said: "Tell him, Farad'n." 
    Farad'n sighed. It was easy to forget the strangeness of this child who was not a child. He could imagine a lifetime married to her, the hidden reservations on every intimacy. It was not a totally pleasant prospect, but he was beginning to recognize its inevitability. Absolute control of dwindling spice supplies! Nothing would move in the universe without the spice. 
    "Later, Tyek," Farad'n said. 
    "But --"
    "Later, I said!" For the first time, he used Voice on Tyekanik, saw the man blink with surprise and remain silent. 
    A tight smile touched Jessica's mouth.
    "He talks of peace and death in the same breath," Stilgar muttered. "Golden Age!"
    Ghanima said: "He'll lead humans through the cult of death into the free air of exuberant life! He speaks of death because that's necessary, Stil. It's a tension by which the living know they're alive. When his Empire falls . . . Oh, yes, it'll fall. You think this is Kralizec now, but Kralizec is yet to come. And when it comes, humans will have renewed their memory of what it's like to be alive. The memory will persist as long as there's a single human living. We'll go through the crucible once more, Stil. And we'll come out of it. We always arise from our own ashes. Always." 
    Farad'n, hearing her words, understood now what she'd meant in telling him about Leto running. He'll not be human.
    Stilgar was not yet convinced. "No more worms," he growled.
    "Oh, the worms will come back," Ghanima assured him. "All will be dead within two hundred years, but they'll come back." 
    "How . . . " Stilgar broke off.
    Farad'n felt his mind awash in revelation. He knew what Ghanima would say before she spoke.
    "The Guild will barely make it through the lean years, and only then because of its stockpiles and ours," Ghanima said. "But there'll be abundance after Kralizec. The worms will return after my brother goes into the sand."

= = = = = =

As with so many other religions, Muad'Dib's Golden Elixir of Life degenerated into external wizardry. Its mystical signs became mere symbols for deeper psychological processes, and those processes, of course, ran wild. What they needed was a living god, and they didn't have one, a situation which Muad'Dib's son has corrected.
-Saying attributed to Lu Tung-pin, (Lu, The Guest of the Cavern)

    Leto sat on the Lion Throne to accept the homage of the tribes. Ghanima stood beside him, one step down. The ceremony in the Great Hall went on for hours. Tribe after Fremen tribe passed before him through their delegates and their Naibs. Each group bore gifts fitting for a god of terrifying powers, a god of vengeance who promised them peace.
    He'd cowed them into submission the previous week, performing for the assembled arifa of all the tribes. The Judges had seen him walk through a pit of fire, emerging unscathed to demonstrate that his skin bore no marks by asking them to study him closely. He'd ordered them to strike him with knives, and the impenetrable skin had sealed his face while they struck at him to no avail. Acids ran off him with only the lightest mist of smoke. He'd eaten their poisons and laughed at them.
    At the end he'd summoned a worm and stood facing them at its mouth. He'd moved from that to the landing field at Arrakeen, where he'd brazenly toppled a Guild frigate by lifting one of its landing fins.
    The arifa had reported all of this with a fearful awe, and now the tribal delegates had come to seal their submission.
    The vaulted space of the Great Hall with its acoustical dampening systems tended to absorb sharp noises, but a constant rustling of moving feet insinuated itself into the senses, riding on dust and the flint odors brought in from the open.
    Jessica, who'd refused to attend, watched from a high spy hole behind the throne. Her attention was caught by Farad'n and the realization that both she and Farad'n had been outmaneuvered. Of course Leto and Ghanima had anticipated the Sisterhood! The twins could consult within themselves a host of Bene Gesserits greater than all now living in the Empire.
    She was particularly bitter at the way the Sisterhood's mythology had trapped Alia. Fear built on fear! The habits of generations had imprinted the fate of Abomination upon her. Alia had known no hope. Of course she'd succumbed. Her fate made the accomplishment of Leto and Ghanima even more difficult to face. Not one way out of the trap, but two. Ghanima's victory over the inner lives and her insistence that Alia deserved only pity were the bitterest things of all. Hypnotic suppression under stress linked to the wooing of a benign ancestor had saved Ghanima. They might have saved Alia. But without hope, nothing had been attempted until it was too late. Alia's water had been poured upon the sand.
    Jessica sighed, shifted her attention to Leto on the throne. A giant canopic jar containing the water of Muad'Dib occupied a place of honor at his right elbow. He'd boasted to Jessica that his father-within laughed at this gesture even while admiring it.
    That jar and the boasting had firmed her resolve not to participate in this ritual. As long as she lived, she knew she could never accept Paul speaking through Leto's mouth. She rejoiced that House Atreides had survived, but the things-that-might-have-been were beyond bearing.
    Farad'n sat cross-legged beside the jar of Muad'Dib's water. It was the position of the Royal Scribe, an honor newly conferred and newly accepted.
    Farad'n felt that he was adjusting nicely to these new realities although Tyekanik still raged and promised dire consequences. Tyekanik and Stilgar had formed a partnership of distrust which seemed to amuse Leto.
    In the hours of the homage ceremony, Farad'n had gone from awe to boredom to awe. They were an endless stream of humanity, these peerless fighting men. Their loyalty renewed to the Atreides on the throne could not be questioned. They stood in submissive terror before him, completely daunted by what the arifa had reported.
    At last it drew to a close. The final Naib stood before Leto -- Stilgar in the "rearguard position of honor." Instead of panniers heavy with spice, fire jewels, or any of the other costly gifts which lay in mounds around the throne, Stilgar bore a headband of braided spice-fiber. The Atreides Hawk had been worked in gold and green into its design.
    Ghanima recognized it and shot a sidewise glance at Leto.
    Stilgar placed the headband on the second step below the throne, bowed low. "I give you the headband worn by your sister when I took her into the desert to protect her," he said. 
    Leto suppressed a smile.
    "I know you've fallen on hard times, Stilgar," Leto said. "Is there something here you would have in return?" He gestured at the piles of costly gifts. 
    "No, My Lord."
    "I accept your gift then," Leto said. He rocked forward, brought up the hem of Ghanima's robe, ripped a thin strip from it. "In return, I give you this bit of Ghanima's robe, the robe she wore when she was stolen from your desert camp, forcing me to save her."
    Stilgar accepted the cloth in a trembling hand. "Do you mock me, My Lord?"
    "Mock you? By my name, Stilgar, never would I mock you. I have given you a gift without price. I command you to carry it always next to your heart as a reminder that all humans are prone to error and all leaders are human."
    A thin chuckle escaped Stilgar. "What a Naib you would have made!" 
    "What a Naib I am! Naib of Naibs. Never forget that!" 
    "As you say, My Lord." Stilgar swallowed, remembering the report of his arifa. And he thought: Once I thought of slaying him. Now it's too late. His glance fell on the jar, a graceful opaque gold capped with green. "That is water of my tribe."
    "And mine," Leto said. "I command you to read the inscription upon its side. Read it aloud that all may hear it." 
    Stilgar cast a questioning glance at Ghanima, but she returned it with a lift of her chin, a cold response which sent a chill through him. Were these Atreides imps bent on holding him to answer for his impetuosity and his mistakes? 
    "Read it," Leto said, pointing.
    Slowly Stilgar mounted the steps, bent to look at the jar. Presently he read aloud: "This water is the ultimate essence, a source of outward streaming creativity. Though motionless, this water is the means of all movement."
    "What does it mean, My Lord?" Stilgar whispered. He felt awed by the words, touched within himself in a place he could not understand.
    "The body of Muad'Dib is a dry shell like that abandoned by an insect," Leto said. "He mastered the inner world while holding the outer in contempt, and this led to catastrophe. He mastered the outer world while excluding the inner world, and this delivered his descendants to the demons. The Golden Elixir will vanish from Dune, yet Muad'Dib's seed goes on, and his water moves our universe."
    Stilgar bowed his head. Mystical things always left him in turmoil.
    "The beginning and the end are one," Leto said. "You live in air but do not see it. A phase has closed. Out of that closing grows the beginning of its opposite. Thus, we will have Kralizec. Everything returns later in changed form. You have felt thoughts in your head; your descendants will feel thoughts in their bellies. Return to Sietch Tabr, Stilgar. Gurney Halleck will join you there as my advisor in your Council." 
    "Don't you trust me, My Lord?" Stilgar's voice was low.
    "Completely, else I'd not send Gurney to you. He'll begin recruiting the new force we'll need soon. I accept your pledge of fealty, Stilgar. You are dismissed."
    Stilgar bowed low, backed off the steps, turned and left the hall. The other Naibs fell into step behind him according to the Fremen principle that "the last shall be first." But some of their queries could be heard on the throne as they departed.
    "What were you talking about up there, Stil? What does that mean, those words on Muad'Dib's water?" 
    Leto spoke to Farad'n. "Did you get all of that, Scribe?" 
    "Yes, My Lord."
    "My grandmother tells me she trained you well in the mnemonic processes of the Bene Gesserit. That's good. I don't want you scribbling beside me." 
    "As you command, My Lord." 
    "Come and stand before me," Leto said.
    Farad'n obeyed, more than ever thankful for Jessica's training. When you accepted the fact that Leto no longer was human, no longer could think as humans thought, the course of his Golden Path became ever more frightening.
    Leto looked up at Farad'n. The guards stood well back out of earshot. Only the counselors of the Inner Presence remained on the floor of the Great Hall, and they stood in subservient groups well beyond the first step. Ghanima had moved closer to rest an arm on the back of the throne.
    "You've not yet agreed to give me your Sardaukar," Leto said. "But you will."
    "I owe you much, but not that," Farad'n said. 
    "You think they'd not mate well with my Fremen?" 
    "As well as those new friends, Stilgar and Tyekanik." 
    "Yet you refuse?" 
    "I await your offer."
    "Then I must make the offer, knowing you will never repeat it. I pray my grandmother has done her part well, that you are prepared to understand." 
    "What must I understand?"
    "There's always a prevailing mystique in any civilization," Leto said. "It builds itself as a barrier against change, and that always leaves future generations unprepared for the universe's treachery. All mystiques are the same in building these barriers -- the religious mystique, the hero-leader mystique, the messiah mystique, the mystique of science/technology, and the mystique of nature itself. We live in an Imperium which such a mystique has shaped, and now that Imperium is falling apart because most people don't distinguish between mystique and their universe. You see, the mystique is like demon possession; it tends to take over the consciousness, becoming all things to the observer."
    "I recognize your grandmother's wisdom in these words," Farad'n said.
    "Well and good, cousin. She asked me if I were Abomination. I answered in the negative. That was my first treachery. You see, Ghanima escaped this, but I did not. I was forced to balance the inner lives under the pressure of excessive melange. I had to seek the active cooperation of those aroused lives within me. Doing this, I avoided the most malignant and chose a dominant helper thrust upon me by the inner awareness which was my father. I am not, in truth, my father or this helper. Then again, I am not the Second Leto." 
    "Explain."
    "You have an admirable directness," Leto said. "I'm a community dominated by one who was ancient and surpassingly powerful. He fathered a dynasty which endured for three thousand of our years. His name was Harum and, until his line trailed out in the congenital weaknesses and superstitions of a descendant, his subjects lived in a rhythmic sublimity. They moved unconsciously with the changes of the seasons. They bred individuals who tended to be short-lived, superstitious, and easily led by a god-king. Taken as a whole, they were a powerful people. Their survival as a species became habit."
    "I don't like the sound of that," Farad'n said.
    "Nor do I, really," Leto said. "But it's the universe I'll create." 
    "Why?"
    "It's a lesson I learned on Dune. We kept the presence of death a dominant specter among the living here. By that presence, the dead changed the living. The people of such a society sink down into their bellies. But when the time comes for the opposite, when they arise, they are great and beautiful." 
    "That doesn't answer my question," Farad'n protested. 
    "You don't trust me, cousin." 
    "Nor does your own grandmother."
    "And with good reason," Leto said. "But she acquiesces because she must. Bene Gesserits are pragmatists in the end. I share their view of our universe, you know. You wear the marks of that universe. You retain the habits of rule, cataloging all around you in terms of their possible threat or value." 
    "I agreed to be your scribe."
    "It amused you and flattered, your real talent, which is that of historian. You've a definite genius for reading the present in terms of the past. You've anticipated me on several occasions." 
    "I don't like your veiled insinuations," Farad'n said.
    "Good. You come from infinite ambition to your present lowered estate. Didn't my grandmother warn you about infinity? It attracts us like a floodlight in the night, blinding us to the excesses it can inflict upon the finite." 
    "Bene Gesserit aphorisms!" Farad'n protested.
    "But much more precise," Leto said. "The Bene Gesserit believed they could predict the course of evolution. But they overlooked their own changes in the course of that evolution. They assumed they would stand still while their breeding plan evolved. I have no such reflexive blindness. Look carefully at me, Farad'n, for I am no longer human."
    "So your sister assures me." Farad'n hesitated. Then: "Abomination?"
    "By the Sisterhood's definition, perhaps. Harum is cruel and autocratic. I partake of his cruelty. Mark me well: I have the cruelty of the husbandman, and this human universe is my farm. Fremen once kept tame eagles as pets, but I'll keep a tame Farad'n." 
    Farad'n's face darkened. "Beware my claws, cousin. I well know my Sardaukar would fall in time before your Fremen. But we'd wound you sorely, and there are jackals waiting to pick off the weak."
    "I will use you well, that I promise," Leto said. He leaned forward. "Did I not say I'm no longer human? Believe me, cousin. No children will spring from my loins, for I no longer have loins. And this forces my second treachery."
    Farad'n waited in silence, seeing at last the direction of Leto's argument.
    "I shall go against every Fremen precept," Leto said. "They will accept because they can do nothing else. I kept you here under the lure of a betrothal, but there will be no betrothal of you and Ghanima. My sister will marry me!"
    "But you --"
    "Marry, I said. Ghanima must continue the Atreides line. There's also the matter of the Bene Gesserit breeding program, which is now my breeding program." 
    "I refuse," Farad'n said.
    "You refuse to father an Atreides dynasty?"
    "What dynasty? You'll occupy the throne for thousands of years,"
    "And mold your descendants in my image. It will be the most intensive, the most inclusive training program in all of history. We'll be an ecosystem in miniature. You see, whatever system animals choose to survive by must be based on the pattern of interlocking communities, interdependence, working together in the common design which is the system. And this system will produce the most knowledgeable rulers ever seen." 
    "You put fancy words on a most distasteful --" 
    "Who will survive Kralizec?" Leto asked. "I promise you, Kralizec will come." 
    "You're a madman! You will shatter the Empire." 
    "Of course I will . . . and I'm not a man. But I'll create a new consciousness in all men. I tell you that below the desert of Dune there's a secret place with the greatest treasure of all time. I do not lie. When the last worm dies and the last melange is harvested upon our sands, these deep treasures will spring up throughout our universe. As the power of the spice monopoly fades and the hidden stockpiles make their mark, new powers will appear throughout our realm. It is time humans learned once more to live in their instincts."
    Ghanima took her arm from the back of the throne, crossed to Farad'n's side, took his hand.
    "As my mother was not wife, you will not be husband," Leto said. "But perhaps there will be love, and that will be enough." 
    "Each day, each moment brings its change," Ghanima said. "One learns by recognizing the moments."
    Farad'n felt the warmth of Ghanima's tiny hand as an insistent presence. He recognized the ebb and flow of Leto's arguments, but not once had Voice been used. It was an appeal to the guts, not to the mind.
    "Is this what you offer for my Sardaukar?" he asked.
    "Much, much more, cousin. I offer your descendants the Imperium. I offer you peace." 
    "What will be the outcome of your peace?" 
    "It's opposite," Leto said, his voice calmly mocking.
    Farad'n shook his head. "I find the price for my Sardaukar very high. Must I remain Scribe, the secret father of your royal line?" 
    "You must." 
    "Will you try to force me into your habit of peace?" 
    "I will." 
    "I'll resist you every day of my life."
    "But that's the function I expect of you, cousin. It's why I chose you. I'll make it official. I will give you a new name. From this moment, you'll be called Breaking of the Habit, which in our tongue is Harq al-Ada. Come, cousin, don't be obtuse. My mother taught you well. Give me your Sardaukar."
    "Give them," Ghanima echoed. "He'll have them one way or another."
    Farad'n heard fear for himself in her voice. Love, then? Leto asked not for reason, but for an intuitive leap. "Take them," Farad'n said.
    "Indeed," Leto said. He lifted himself from the throne, a curiously fluid motion as though he kept his terrible powers under most delicate control. Leto stepped down then to Ghanima's level, moved her gently until she faced away from him, turned and placed his back against hers. "Note this, cousin Harq al-Ada. This is the way it will always be with us. We'll stand thus when we are married. Back to back, each looking outward from the other to protect the one thing which we have always been." He turned, looked mockingly at Farad'n, lowered his voice: "Remember that, cousin, when you're face to face with my Ghanima. Remember that when you whisper of love and soft things, when you are most tempted by the habits of my peace and my contentment. Your back will remain exposed."
    Turning from them, he strode down the steps into the waiting courtiers, picked them up in his wake like satellites, and left the hall.
    Ghanima once more took Farad'n's hand, but her gaze looked beyond the far end of the hall long after Leto had left it. "One of us had to accept the agony," she said, "and he was always the stronger."Dune Messiah
Frank Herbert

Copyright 1969

Excerpts from the Death Cell Interview with Bronso of IX

Q: What led you to take your particular approach to a history of Muad'dib?
A: Why should I answer your questions? 
Q: Because I will preserve your words. 
A: Ahhh! The ultimate appeal to a historian!
Q: Will you cooperate then?
A: Why not? But you'll never understand what inspired my Analysis of History. Never. You Priests have too much at stake to . . . 
Q: Try me.
A: Try you? Well, Again . . . why not? I was caught by the shallowness of the common view of this planet which arises from its popular name: Dune. Not Arrakis, notice, but Dune. History is obsessed by Dune as desert, as birthplace of the Fremen. Such history concentrates on the customs which grew out of water scarcity and the fact that Fremen led semi-nomadic lives in stillsuits which recovered most of their body's moisture.
Q: Are these things not true, then?
A: They are surface truth. As well ignore what lies beneath that surface as . . . as try to understand my birthplanet, Ix, without exploring how we derived our name from the fact that we are the ninth planet of our sun. No . . . no. It is not enough to see Dune as a place of savage storms. It is not enough to talk about the threat posed by the gigantic sandworms. 
Q: But such things are crucial to the Arrakeen character! 
A: Crucial? Of course. But they produce a one-view planet in the same way that Dune is a one-crop planet because it is the sole and exclusive source of the spice, melange.
Q: Yes. Let us hear you expand on the sacred spice. 
A: Sacred! As with all things sacred, it gives with one hand and takes with the other. It extends life and allows the adept to foresee his future, but it ties him to a cruel addiction and marks his eyes as yours are marked: total blue without any white. Your eyes, your organs of sight, become one thing without contrast, a single view.
Q: Such heresy brought you to this cell!
A: I was brought to this cell by your Priests. As with all priests, you learned early to call the truth heresy. 
Q: You are here because you dared to say that Paul Atreides lost something essential to his humanity before he could become Muad'dib.
A: Not to speak of his losing his father here in the Harkonnen war. Nor the death of Duncan Idaho, who sacrificed himself that Paul and the Lady Jessica could escape.
Q: Your cynicism is duly noted.
A: Cynicism! That, no doubt is a greater crime than heresy. But, you see, I'm not really a cynic. I'm just an observer and commentator. I saw true nobility in Paul as he fled into the desert with his pregnant mother. Of course, she was a great asset as well as a burden.
Q: The flaw in your historians is that you'll never leave well enough alone. You see true nobility in the Holy Muad'dib, but you must append a cynical footnote. It's no wonder that the Bene Gesserit also denounce you.
A: You Priests do well to make common cause with the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. They, too, survive by concealing what they do. But they cannot conceal the fact that the Lady Jessica was a Bene Gesserit-trained adept. You know she trained her son in the sisterhood's ways. My crime was to discuss this as a phenomenon, to expound upon their mental arts and their genetic program. You don't want attention called to the fact that Muad'dib was the Sisterhood's hoped for captive messiah, that he was their kwisatz haderach before he was your prophet. 
Q: If I had any doubts about your death sentence, you have dispelled them. 
A: I can only die once.
Q: There are deaths and there are deaths. 
A: Beware lest you make a martyr of me. I do not think Muad'dib . . . Tell me, does Muad'dib know what you do in these dungeons?
Q: We do not trouble the Holy Family with trivia. 
A: (Laughter) And for this Paul Atreides fought his way to a niche among the Fremen! For this he learned to control and ride the sandworm! It was a mistake to answer your questions.
Q: But I will keep my promise to preserve your words. 
A: Will you really? Then listen to me carefully, you Fremen degenerate, you Priest with no god except yourself! You have much to answer for. It was a Fremen ritual which gave Paul his first massive dose of melange, thereby opening him to visions of his futures. It was a Fremen ritual by which that same melange awakened the unborn Alia in the Lady Jessica's womb. Have you considered what it meant for Alia to be born into this universe fully cognitive, possessed of all her mother's memories and knowledge? No rape could be more terrifying. 
Q: Without the sacred melange Muad'dib would not have become leader of all Fremen. Without her holy experience Alia would not be Alia.
A: Without your blind Fremen cruelty you would not be a priest. Ahhh, I know you Fremen. You think Muad'dib is yours because he mated with Chani, because he adopted Fremen customs. But he was an Atreides first and he was trained by a Bene Gesserit adept. He possessed disciplines totally unknown to you. You thought he brought you new organization and a new mission. He promised to transform your desert planet into a water-rich paradise. And while he dazzled you with such visions, he took your virginity! 
Q: Such heresy does not change the fact that the Ecological Transformation of Dune proceeds apace. 
A: And I committed the heresy of tracing the roots of that transformation, of exploring the consequences. That battle out there on the Plains of Arrakeen may have taught the universe that Fremen could defeat Imperial Sardaukar, but what else did it teach? When the stellar empire of the Corrino Family became a Fremen empire under Muad'dib, what else did the Empire become? Your Jihad only took twelve years, but what a lesson it taught. Now, the Empire understands the sham of Muad'dib's marriage to the Princess Irulan!
Q: You dare accuse Muad'dib of sham!
A: Though you kill me for it, it's not heresy. The Princess became his consort, not his mate. Chani, his little Fremen darling -- she's his mate. Everyone knows this. Irulan was the key to a throne, nothing more. 
Q: It's easy to see why those who conspire against Muad'dib use your Analysis of History as their rallying argument!
A: I'll not persuade you; I know that. But the argument of the conspiracy came before my Analysis. Twelve years of Muad'dib's Jihad created the argument. That's what united the ancient power groups and ignited the conspiracy against Muad'dib.

= = = = = =

Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad'dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his sister, Alia, it is difficult to see the real persons behind these veils. But there were, after all, a man born Paul Atreides and a woman born Alia. Their flesh was subject to space and time. And even though their oracular powers placed them beyond the usual limits of time and space, they came from human stock. They experienced real events which left real traces upon a real universe. To understand them, it must be seen that their catastrophe was the catastrophe of all mankind. This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad'dib or his sister, but to their heirs -- to all of us.
-Dedication in the Muad'dib Concordance as copied from The Tabla Memorium of the Mahdi Spirit Cult

    Muad'dib's Imperial reign generated more historians than any other era in human history. Most of them argued a particular viewpoint, jealous and sectarian, but it says something about the peculiar impact of this man that he aroused such passions on so many diverse worlds.
    Of course, he contained the ingredients of history, ideal and idealized. This man, born Paul Atreides in an ancient Great Family, received the deep prana-bindu training from the Lady Jessica, his Bene Gesserit mother, and had through this a superb control over muscles and nerves. But more than that, he was a mentat, an intellect whose capacities surpassed those of the religiously proscribed mechanical computers used by the ancients.
    Above all else, Muad'dib was the kwisatz haderach which the Sisterhood's breeding program had sought across thousands of generations.
    The kwisatz haderach, then, the one who could be "many places at once," this prophet, this man through whom the Bene Gesserit hoped to control human destiny -- this man became Emperor Muad'dib and executed a marriage of convenience with a daughter of the Padishah Emperor he had defeated.
    Think on the paradox, the failure implicit in this moment, for you surely have read other histories and know the surface facts. Muad'dib's wild Fremen did, indeed, overwhelm the Padishah Shaddam IV. They toppled the Sardaukar legions, the allied forces of the Great Houses, the Harkonnen armies and the mercenaries bought with money voted in the Landsraad. He brought the Spacing Guild to its knees and placed his own sister, Alia, on the religious throne the Bene Gesserit had thought their own.
    He did all these things and more.
    Muad'dib's Qizarate missionaries carried their religious war across space in a Jihad whose major impetus endured only twelve standard years, but in that time, religious colonialism brought all but a fraction of the human universe under one rule.
    He did this because capture of Arrakis, that planet known more often as Dune, gave him a monopoly over the ultimate coin of the realm -- the geriatric spice, melange, the poison that gave life.
    Here was another ingredient of ideal history: a material whose psychic chemistry unraveled Time. Without melange, the Sisterhood's Reverend Mothers could not perform their feats of observation and human control. Without melange, the Guild's Steersmen could not navigate across space. Without melange, billions upon billions of Imperial citizens would die of addictive withdrawal.
    Without melange, Paul-Muad'dib could not prophesy.
    We know this moment of supreme power contained failure. There can be only one answer, that completely accurate and total prediction is lethal.
    Other histories say Muad'dib was defeated by obvious plotters -- the Guild, the Sisterhood and the scientific amoralists of the Bene Tleilex with their Face-Dancer disguises. Other histories point out the spies in Muad'dib's household. They make much of the Dune Tarot which clouded Muad'dib's powers of prophecy. Some show how Muad'dib was made to accept the services of a ghola, the flesh brought back from the dead and trained to destroy him. But certainly they must know this ghola was Duncan Idaho, the Atreides lieutenant who perished saving the life of the young Paul.
    Yet, they delineate the Qizarate cabal guided by Korba the Panegyrist. They take us step by step through Korba's plan to make a martyr of Muad'dib and place the blame on Chani, the Fremen concubine.
    How can any of this explain the facts as history has revealed them? They cannot. Only through the lethal nature of prophecy can we understand the failure of such enormous and far-seeing power.
    Hopefully, other historians will learn something from this revelation.
    -Analysis of History: Muad'dib by Bronso of Ix

= = = = = =

There exists no separation between gods and men: one blends softly casual into the other.
-Proverbs of Muad'dib

    Despite the murderous nature of the plot he hoped to devise, the thoughts of Scytale, the Tleilaxu Face Dancer, returned again and again to rueful compassion.
    I shall regret causing death and misery to Muad'dib, he told himself.
    He kept this benignity carefully hidden from his fellow conspirators. Such feelings told him, though, that he found it easier to identify with the victim than with the attackers -- a thing characteristic of the Tleilaxu.
    Scytale stood in bemused silence somewhat apart from the others. The argument about psychic poison had been going on for some time now. It was energetic and vehement, but polite in that blindly compulsive way adepts of the Great Schools always adopted for matters close to their dogma.
    "When you think you have him skewered, right then you'll find him unwounded!"
    That was the old Reverend Mother of the Bene Gesserit, Gaius Helen Mohiam, their hostess here on Wallach IX. She was a black-robed stick figure, a witch crone seated in a floater chair at Scytale's left. Her aba hood had been thrown back to expose a leathery face beneath silver hair. Deeply pocketed eyes stared out of skull-mask features.
    They were using a mirabhasa language, honed phalange consonants and joined vowels. It was an instrument for conveying fine emotional subtleties. Edric, the Guild Steersman, replied to the Reverend Mother now with a vocal curtsy contained in a sneer -- a lovely touch of disdainful politeness.
    Scytale looked at the Guild envoy. Edric swam in a container of orange gas only a few paces away. His container sat in the center of the transparent dome which the Bene Gesserit had built for this meeting. The Guildsman was an elongated figure, vaguely humanoid with finned feet and hugely fanned membranous hands -- a fish in a strange sea. His tank's vents emitted a pale orange cloud rich with the smell of the geriatric spice, melange.
    "If we go on this way, we'll die of stupidity!" 
    That was the fourth person present -- the potential member of the conspiracy -- Princess Irulan, wife (but not mate, Scytale reminded himself) of their mutual foe. She stood at a corner of Edric's tank, a tall blond beauty, splendid in a robe of blue whale fur and matching hat. Gold buttons glittered at her ears. She carried herself with an aristocrat's hauteur, but something in the absorbed smoothness of her features betrayed the controls of her Bene Gesserit background.
    Scytale's mind turned from nuances of language and faces to nuances of location. All around the dome lay hills mangy with melting snow which reflected mottled wet blueness from the small blue-white sun hanging at the meridian.
    Why this particular place? Scytale wondered. The Bene Gesserit seldom did anything casually. Take the dome's open plan: a more conventional and confining space might've inflicted the Guildsman with claustrophobic nervousness. Inhibitions in his psyche were those of birth and life off-planet in open space.
    To have built this place especially for Edric, though -- what a sharp finger that pointed at his weakness. 
    What here, Scytale wondered, was aimed at me?
    "Have you nothing to say for yourself, Scytale?" the Reverend Mother demanded.
    "You wish to draw me into this fools' fight?" Scytale asked. "Very well. We're dealing with a potential messiah. You don't launch a frontal attack upon such a one. Martyrdom would defeat us." 
    They all stared at him.
    "You think that's the only danger?" the Reverend Mother demanded, voice wheezing.
    Scytale shrugged. He had chosen a bland, round-faced appearance for this meeting, jolly features and vapid full lips, the body of a bloated dumpling. It occurred to him now, as he studied his fellow conspirators, that he had made an ideal choice -- out of instinct perhaps. He alone in this group could manipulate fleshly appearance across a wide spectrum of bodily shapes and features. He was the human chameleon, a Face Dancer, and the shape he wore now invited others to judge him too lightly. 
    "Well?" the Reverend Mother pressed.
    "I was enjoying the silence," Scytale said. "Our hostilities are better left unvoiced."
    The Reverend Mother drew back, and Scytale saw her reassessing him. They were all products of profound prana-bindu training, capable of muscle and nerve control that few humans ever achieved. But Scytale, a Face Dancer, had muscles and nerve linkages the others didn't even possess plus a special quality of sympatico, a mimic's insight with which he could put on the psyche of another as well as the other's appearance.
    Scytale gave her enough time to complete the reassessment, said: "Poison!" He uttered the word with the atonals which said he alone understood its secret meaning.
    The Guildsman stirred and his voice rolled from the glittering speaker globe which orbited a corner of his tank above Irulan. "We're discussing psychic poison, not a physical one."
    Scytale laughed. Mirabhasa laughter could flay an opponent and he held nothing back now.
    Irulan smiled in appreciation, but the corners of the Reverend Mother's eyes revealed a faint hint of anger. 
    "Stop that!" Mohiam rasped.
    Scytale stopped, but he had their attention now, Edric in a silent rage, the Reverend Mother alert in her anger, Irulan amused but puzzled.
    "Our friend Edric suggests," Scytale said, "that a pair of Bene Gesserit witches trained in all their subtle ways have not learned the true uses of deception." 
    Mohiam turned to stare out at the cold hills of her Bene Gesserit homeworld. She was beginning to see the vital thing here, Scytale realized. That was good. Irulan, though, was another matter.
    "Are you one of us or not, Scytale?" Edric asked. He stared out of tiny rodent eyes.
    "My allegiance is not the issue," Scytale said. He kept his attention on Irulan. "You are wondering, Princess, if this was why you came all those parsecs, risked so much?" 
    She nodded agreement.
    "Was it to bandy platitudes with a humanoid fish or dispute with a fat Tleilaxu Face Dancer?" Scytale asked.
    She stepped away from Edric's tank, shaking her head in annoyance at the thick odor of melange.
    Edric took this moment to pop a melange pill into his mouth. He ate the spice and breathed it and, no doubt, drank it, Scytale noted. Understandable, because the spice heightened a Steersman's prescience, gave him the power to guide a Guild heighliner across space at translight speeds. With spice awareness he found that line of the ship's future which avoided peril. Edric smelled another kind of peril now, but his crutch of prescience might not find it.
    "I think it was a mistake for me to come here," Irulan said.
    The Reverend Mother turned, opened her eyes, closed them, a curiously reptilian gesture.
    Scytale shifted his gaze from Irulan to the tank, inviting the Princess to share his viewpoint. She would, Scytale knew, see Edric as a repellent figure: the bold stare, those monstrous feet and hands moving softly in the gas, the smoky swirling of orange eddies around him. She would wonder about his sex habits, thinking how odd it would be to mate with such a one. Even the field-force generator which recreated for Edric the weightlessness of space would set him apart from her now.
    "Princess," Scytale said, "because of Edric here, your husband's oracular sight cannot stumble upon certain incidents, including this one . . . presumably." 
    "Presumably," Irulan said.
    Eyes closed, the Reverend Mother nodded. "The phenomenon of prescience is poorly understood even by its initiates," she said.
    "I am a full Guild Navigator and have the Power," Edric said.
    Again, the Reverend Mother opened her eyes. This time, she stared at the Face Dancer, eyes probing with that peculiar Bene Gesserit intensity. She was weighing minutiae.
    "No, Reverend Mother," Scytale murmured, "I am not as simple as I appeared."
    "We don't understand this Power of second sight," Irulan said. "There's a point. Edric says my husband cannot see, know or predict what happens within the sphere of a Navigator's influence. But how far does that influence extend?"
    "There are people and things in our universe which I know only by their effects," Edric said, his fish mouth held in a thin line. "I know they have been here . . . there . . . somewhere. As water creatures stir up the currents in their passage, so the prescient stir up Time. I have seen where your husband has been; never have I seen him nor the people who truly share his aims and loyalties. This is the concealment which an adept gives to those who are his."
    "Irulan is not yours," Scytale said. And he looked sideways at the Princess.
    "We all know why the conspiracy must be conducted only in my presence," Edric said.
    Using the voice mode for describing a machine. Irulan said: "You have your uses, apparently."
    She sees him now for what he is, Scytale thought. Good!
    "The future is a thing to be shaped," Scytale said. "Hold that thought, Princess." 
    Irulan glanced at the Face Dancer.
    "People who share Paul's aims and loyalties," she said. "Certain of his Fremen legionaries, then, wear his cloak. I have seen him prophesy for them, heard their cries of adulation for their Mahdi, their Muad'dib." 
    It has occurred to her, Scytale thought, that she is on trial here, that a Judgment remains to be made which could preserve her or destroy her. She sees the trap we set for her.
    Momentarily, Scytale's gaze locked with that of the Reverend Mother and he experienced the odd realization that they had shared this thought about Irulan. The Bene Gesserit, of course, had briefed their Princess, primed her with the lie adroit. But the moment always came when a Bene Gesserit must trust her own training and instincts.
    "Princess, I know what it is you most desire from the Emperor," Edric said.
    "Who does not know it?" Irulan asked.
    "You wish to be the founding mother of the royal dynasty," Edric said, as though he had not heard her. "Unless you join us, that will never happen. Take my oracular word on it. The Emperor married you for political reasons, but you'll never share his bed." 
    "So the oracle is also a voyeur," Irulan sneered.
    "The Emperor is more firmly wedded to his Fremen concubine than he is to you!" Edric snapped. 
    "And she gives him no heir," Irulan said.
    "Reason is the first victim of strong emotion," Scytale murmured. He sensed the outpouring of Irulan's anger, saw his admonition take effect.
    "She gives him no heir," Irulan said, her voice measuring out controlled calmness, "because I am secretly administering a contraceptive. Is that the sort of admission you wanted from me?"
    "It'd not be a thing for the Emperor to discover," Edric said, smiling.
    "I have lies ready for him," Irulan said. "He may have truthsense, but some lies are easier to believe than the truth."
    "You must make the choice, Princess," Scytale said, "but understand what it is protects you." 
    "Paul is fair with me," she said. "I sit in his Council." 
    "In the twelve years you've been his Princess Consort," Edric asked, "has he shown you the slightest warmth?" 
    Irulan shook her head.
    "He deposed your father with his infamous Fremen horde, married you to fix his claim to the throne, yet he has never crowned you Empress," Edric said.
    "Edric tries to sway you with emotion, Princess," Scytale said. "Is that not interesting?"
    She glanced at the Face Dancer, saw the bold smile on his features, answered it with raised eyebrows. She was fully aware now, Scytale saw, that if she left this conference under Edric's sway, part of their plot, these moments might be concealed from Paul's oracular vision. If she withheld commitment, though . . .
    "Does it seem to you, Princess," Scytale asked, "that Edric holds undue sway in our conspiracy?" 
    "I've already agreed," Edric said, "that I'll defer to the best judgment offered in our councils." 
    "And who chooses the best judgment?" Scytale asked.
    "Do you wish the Princess to leave here without joining us?" Edric asked.
    "He wishes her commitment to be a real one," the Reverend Mother growled. "There should be no trickery between us."
    Irulan, Scytale saw, had relaxed into a thinking posture, hands concealed in the sleeves of her robe. She would be thinking now of the bait Edric had offered: to found a royal dynasty! She would be wondering what scheme the conspirators had provided to protect themselves from her. She would be weighing many things.
    "Scytale," Irulan said presently, "it is said that you Tleilaxu have an odd system of honor: your victims must always have a means of escape." 
    "If they can but find it," Scytale agreed. 
    "Am I a victim?" Irulan asked. 
    A burst of laughter escaped Scytale. 
    The Reverend Mother snorted.
    "Princess," Edric said, his voice softly persuasive, "you already are one of us, have no fear of that. Do you not spy upon the Imperial Household for your Bene Gesserit superiors?" 
    "Paul knows I report to my teachers," she said.
    "But don't you give them the material for strong propaganda against your Emperor?" Edric asked.
    Not "our" Emperor, Scytale noted. "Your" Emperor. Irulan is too much the Bene Gesserit to miss that slip.
    "The question is one of powers and how they may be used," Scytale said, moving closer to the Guildsman's tank. "We of the Tleilaxu believe that in all the universe there is only the insatiable appetite of matter, that energy is the only true solid. And energy learns. Hear me well, Princess: energy learns. This, we call power."
    "You haven't convinced me we can defeat the Emperor," Irulan said.
    "We haven't even convinced ourselves," Scytale said.
    "Everywhere we turn," Irulan said, "his power confronts us. He's the kwisatz haderach, the one who can be many places at once. He's the Mahdi whose merest whim is absolute command to his Qizarate missionaries. He's the mentat whose computational mind surpasses the greatest ancient computers. He is Muad'dib whose orders to the Fremen legions depopulate planets. He possesses oracular vision which sees into the future. He has that gene pattern which we Bene Gesserits covet for --" 
    "We know his attributes," the Reverend Mother interrupted. "And we know the abomination, his sister Alia, possesses this gene pattern. But they're also humans, both of them. Thus, they have weaknesses." 
    "And where are those human weaknesses?" the Face Dancer asked. "Shall we search for them in the religious arm of his Jihad? Can the Emperor's Qizara be turned against him? What about the civil authority of the Great Houses? Can the Landsraad Congress do more than raise a verbal clamor?"
    "I suggest the Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles," Edric said, turning in his tank. "CHOAM is business and business follows profits."
    "Or perhaps the Emperor's mother," Scytale said. "The Lady Jessica, I understand, remains on Caladan, but is in frequent communication with her son."
    "That traitorous bitch," Mohiam said, voice level. "Would I might disown my own hands which trained her." 
    "Our conspiracy requires a lever," Scytale said.
    "We are more than conspirators," the Reverend Mother countered.
    "Ah, yes," Scytale agreed. "We are energetic and we learn quickly. This makes us the one true hope, the certain salvation of humankind." He spoke in the speech mode for absolute conviction, which was perhaps the ultimate sneer coming, as it did, from a Tleilaxu.
    Only the Reverend Mother appeared to understand the subtlety. "Why?" she asked, directing the question at Scytale.
    Before the Face Dancer could answer, Edric cleared his throat, said: "Let us not bandy philosophical nonsense. Every question can be boiled down to the one: 'Why is there anything?' Every religious, business and governmental question has the single derivative: 'Who will exercise the power?' Alliances, combines, complexes, they all chase mirages unless they go for the power. All else is nonsense, as most thinking beings come to realize." 
    Scytale shrugged, a gesture designed solely for the Reverend Mother. Edric had answered her question for him. The pontificating fool was their major weakness. To make sure the Reverend Mother understood, Scytale said: "Listening carefully to the teacher, one acquires an education." 
    The Reverend Mother nodded slowly.
    "Princess," Edric said, "make your choice. You have been chosen as an instrument of destiny, the very finest . . . "
    "Save your praise for those who can be swayed by it," Irulan said. "Earlier, you mentioned a ghost, a revenant with which we may contaminate the Emperor. Explain this." 
    "The Atreides will defeat himself!" Edric crowed.
    "Stop talking riddles!" Irulan snapped. "What is this ghost?"
    "A very unusual ghost," Edric said. "It has a body and a name. The body -- that's the flesh of a renowned swordmaster known as Duncan Idaho. The name . . ." 
    "Idaho's dead," Irulan said. "Paul has mourned the loss often in my presence. He saw Idaho killed by my father's Sardaukar."
    "Even in defeat," Edric said, "your father's Sardaukar did not abandon wisdom. Let us suppose a wise Sardaukar commander recognized the swordmaster in a corpse his men had slain. What then? There exist uses for such flesh and training . . . if one acts swiftly." 
    "A Tleilaxu ghola," Irulan whispered, looking sideways at Scytale.
    Scytale, observing her attention, exercised his Face-Dancer powers -- shape flowing into shape, flesh moving and readjusting. Presently, a slender man stood before her. The face remained somewhat round, but darker and with slightly flattened features. High cheekbones formed shelves for eyes with definite epicanthic folds. The hair was black and unruly.
    "A ghola of this appearance," Edric said, pointing to Scytale.
    "Or merely another Face Dancer?" Irulan asked.
    "No Face Dancer," Edric said. "A Face Dancer risks exposure under prolonged surveillance. No; let us assume that our wise Sardaukar commander had Idaho's corpse preserved for the axolotl tanks. Why not? This corpse held the flesh and nerves of one of the finest swordsmen in history, an adviser to the Atreides, a military genius. What a waste to lose all that training and ability when it might be revived as an instructor for the Sardaukar." 
    "I heard not a whisper of this and I was one of my father's confidantes," Irulan said.
    "Ahh, but your father was a defeated man and within a few hours you had been sold to the new Emperor," Edric said.
    "Was it done?" she demanded.
    With a maddening air of complacency, Edric said: "Let us presume that our wise Sardaukar commander, knowing the need for speed, immediately sent the preserved flesh of Idaho to the Bene Tleilaxu. Let us suppose further that the commander and his men died before conveying this information to your father -- who couldn't have made much use of it anyway. There would remain then a physical fact, a bit of flesh which had been sent off to the Tleilaxu. There was only one way for it to be sent, of course, on a heighliner. We of the Guild naturally know every cargo we transport. Learning of this one, would we not think it additional wisdom to purchase the ghola as a gift befitting an Emperor?" 
    "You've done it then," Irulan said.
    Scytale, who had resumed his roly-poly first appearance, said: "As our long-winded friend indicates, we've done it." 
    "How has Idaho been conditioned?" Irulan asked.
    "Idaho?" Edric asked, looking at the Tleilaxu. "Do you know of an Idaho, Scytale?" 
    "We sold you a creature called Hayt," Scytale said.
    "Ah, yes -- Hayt," Edric said. "Why did you sell him to us?"
    "Because we once bred a kwisatz haderach of our own," Scytale said.
    With a quick movement of her old head, the Reverend Mother looked up at him. "You didn't tell us that!" she accused.
    "You didn't ask," Scytale said.
    "How did you overcome your kwisatz haderach?" Irulan asked.
    "A creature who has spent his life creating one particular representation of his selfdom will die rather than become the antithesis of that representation," Scytale said.
    "I do not understand," Edric ventured. 
    "He killed himself," the Reverend Mother growled.
    "Follow me well, Reverend Mother," Scytale warned, using a voice mode which said: You are not a sex object, have never been a sex object, cannot be a sex object.
    The Tleilaxu waited for the blatant emphasis to sink in. She must not mistake his intent. Realization must pass through anger into awareness that the Tleilaxu certainly could not make such an accusation, knowing as he must the breeding requirements of the Sisterhood. His words, though, contained a gutter insult, completely out of character for a Tleilaxu.
    Swiftly, using the mirabhasa placative mode, Edric tried to smooth over the moment. "Scytale, you told us you sold Hayt because you shared our desire on how to use him."
    "Edric, you will remain silent until I give you permission to speak," Scytale said. And as the Guildsman started to protest, the Reverend Mother snapped: "Shut up, Edric!"
    The Guildsman drew back into his tank in flailing agitation.
    "Our own transient emotions aren't pertinent to a solution of the mutual problem," Scytale said. "They cloud reasoning because the only relevant emotion is the basic fear which brought us to this meeting." 
    "We understand," Irulan said, glancing at the Reverend Mother.
    "You must see the dangerous limitations of our shield," Scytale said. "The oracle cannot chance upon what it cannot understand." 
    "You are devious, Scytale," Irulan said.
    How devious she must not guess, Scytale thought. When this is done, we will possess a kwisatz haderach we can control. These others will possess nothing.
    "What was the origin of your kwisatz haderach?" the Reverend Mother asked.
    "We've dabbled in various pure essences," Scytale said. "Pure good and pure evil. A pure villain who delights only in creating pain and terror can be quite educational." 
    "The old Baron Harkonnen, our Emperor's grandfather, was he a Tleilaxu creation?" Irulan asked.
    "Not one of ours," Scytale said. "But then nature often produces creations as deadly as ours. We merely produce them under conditions where we can study them." 
    "I will not be passed by and treated this way!" Edric protested. "Who is it hides this meeting from --" 
    "You see?" Scytale asked. "Whose best judgment conceals us? What judgment?"
    "I wish to discuss our mode of giving Hayt to the Emperor," Edric insisted. "It's my understanding that Hayt reflects the old morality that the Atreides learned on his birthworld. Hayt is supposed to make it easy for the Emperor to enlarge his moral nature, to delineate the positive-negative elements of life and religion." 
    Scytale smiled, passing a benign gaze over his companions. They were as he'd been led to expect. The old Reverend Mother wielded her emotions like a scythe. Irulan had been well trained for a task at which she had failed, a flawed Bene Gesserit creation. Edric was no more (and no less) than the magician's hand: he might conceal and distract. For now, Edric relapsed into sullen silence as the others ignored him.
    "Do I understand that this Hayt is intended to poison Paul's psyche?" Irulan asked. 
    "More or less," Scytale said.
    "And what of the Qizarate?" Irulan asked.
    "It requires only the slightest shift in emphasis, a glissade of the emotions, to transform envy into enmity," Scytale said.
    "And CHOAM?" Irulan asked.
    "They will rally round profit," Scytale said. 
    "What of the other power groups?"
    "One invokes the name of government," Scytale said. "We will annex the less powerful in the name of morality and progress. Our opposition will die of its own entanglements." 
    "Alia, too?"
    "Hayt is a multi-purpose ghola," Scytale said. "The Emperor's sister is of an age when she can be distracted by a charming male designed for that purpose. She will be attracted by his maleness and by his abilities as a mentat." 
    Mohiam allowed her old eyes to go wide in surprise. "The ghola's a mentat? That's a dangerous move." 
    "To be accurate," Irulan said, "a mentat must have accurate data. What if Paul asks him to define the purpose behind our gift?"
    "Hayt will tell the truth," Scytale said. "It makes no difference."
    "So you leave an escape door open for Paul," Irulan said.
    "A mentat!" Mohiam muttered.
    Scytale glanced at the old Reverend Mother, seeing the ancient hates which colored her responses. From the days of the Butlerian Jihad when "thinking machines" had been wiped from most of the universe, computers had inspired distrust. Old emotions colored the human computer as well.
    "I do not like the way you smile," Mohiam said abruptly, speaking in the truth mode as she glared up at Scytale.
    In the same mode, Scytale said: "And I think less of what pleases you. But we must work together. We all see that." He glanced at the Guildsman. "Don't we, Edric?" 
    "You teach painful lessons," Edric said. "I presume you wished to make it plain that I must not assert myself against the combined judgments of my fellow conspirators." 
    "You see, he can be taught," Scytale said.
    "I see other things as well," Edric growled. "The Atreides holds a monopoly on the spice. Without it I cannot probe the future. The Bene Gesserit lose their truthsense. We have stockpiles, but these are finite. Melange is a powerful coin."
    "Our civilization has more than one coin," Scytale said. "Thus, the law of supply and demand fails." 
    "You think to steal the secret of it," Mohiam wheezed. "And him with a planet guarded by his mad Fremen!" 
    "The Fremen are civil, educated and ignorant," Scytale said. "They're not mad. They're trained to believe, not to know. Belief can be manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous."
    "But will I be left with something to father a royal dynasty?" Irulan asked.
    They all heard the commitment in her voice, but only Edric smiled at it.
    "Something," Scytale said. "Something." 
    "It means the end of this Atreides as a ruling force," Edric said.
    "I should imagine that others less gifted as oracles have made that prediction," Scytale said. "For them, 'mektub al mellah', as the Fremen say." 
    "The thing was written with salt," Irulan translated.
    As she spoke, Scytale recognized what the Bene Gesserit had arrayed here for him -- a beautiful and intelligent female who could never be his. Ah, well, he thought, perhaps I'll copy her for another.

= = = = = =

Every civilization must contend with an unconscious force which can block, betray or countermand almost any conscious intention of the collectivity.
-Tleilaxu Theorem (unproven)

    Paul sat on the edge of his bed and began stripping off his desert boots. They smelled rancid from the lubricant which eased the action of the heel-powered pumps that drove his stillsuit. It was late. He had prolonged his nighttime walk and caused worry for those who loved him. Admittedly, the walks were dangerous, but it was a kind of danger he could recognize and meet immediately. Something compelling and attractive surrounded walking anonymously at night in the streets of Arrakeen.
    He tossed the boots into the corner beneath the room's lone glowglobe, attacked the seal strips of his stillsuit. Gods below, how tired he was! The tiredness stopped at his muscles, though, and left his mind seething. Watching the mundane activities of everyday life filled him with profound envy. Most of that nameless flowing life outside the walls of his Keep couldn't be shared by an Emperor -- but . . . to walk down a public street without attracting attention: what a privilege! To pass by the clamoring of mendicant pilgrims, to hear a Fremen curse a shopkeeper: "You have damp hands!" . . . 
    Paul smiled at the memory, slipped out of his stillsuit.
    He stood naked and oddly attuned to his world. Dune was a world of paradox now -- a world under siege, yet the center of power. To come under siege, he decided, was the inevitable fate of power. He stared down at the green carpeting, feeling its rough texture against his soles.
    The streets had been ankle deep in sand blown over the Shield Wall on the stratus wind. Foot traffic had churned it into choking dust which clogged stillsuit Filters. He could smell the dust even now despite a blower cleaning at the portals of his Keep. It was an odor full of desert memories.
    Other days . . . other dangers.
    Compared to those other days, the peril in his lonely walks remained minor. But, putting on a stillsuit, he put on the desert. The suit with all its apparatus for reclaiming his body's moisture guided his thoughts in subtle ways, fixed his movements in a desert pattern. He became wild Fremen. More than a disguise, the suit made of him a stranger to his city self. In the stillsuit, he abandoned security and put on the old skills of violence. Pilgrims and townfolk passed him then with eyes downcast. They left the wild ones strictly alone out of prudence. If the desert had a face for city folk, it was a Fremen face concealed by a stillsuit's mouth-nose filters.
    In truth, there existed now only the small danger that someone from the old sietch days might mark him by his walk, by his odor or by his eyes. Even then, the chances of meeting an enemy remained small.
    A swish of door hangings and a wash of light broke his reverie. Chani entered bearing his coffee service on a platinum tray. Two slaved glowglobes followed her, darting to their positions: one at the head of their bed, one hovering beside her to light her work.
    Chani moved with an ageless air of fragile power -- so self-contained, so vulnerable. Something about the way she bent over the coffee service reminded him then of their first days. Her features remained darkly elfin, seemingly unmarked by their years -- unless one examined the outer corners of her whiteless eyes, noting the lines there: "sandtracks," the Fremen of the desert called them.
    Steam wafted from the pot as she lifted the lid by its Hagar emerald knob. He could tell the coffee wasn't yet ready by the way she replaced the lid. The pot -- fluting silver female shape, pregnant -- had come to him as a ghanima, a spoil of battle won when he'd slain the former owner in single combat. Jamis, that'd been the man's name . . . Jamis. What an odd immortality death had earned for Jamis. Knowing death to be inevitable, had Jamis carried that particular one in his hand?
    Chani put out cups: blue pottery squatting like attendants beneath the immense pot. There were three cups: one for each drinker and one for all the former owners.
    "It'll only be a moment," she said.
    She looked at him then, and Paul wondered how he appeared in her eyes. Was he yet the exotic offworlder, slim and wiry but water-fat when compared to Fremen? Had he remained the Usul of his tribal name who'd taken her in "Fremen tau" while they'd been fugitives in the desert?
    Paul stared down at his own body: hard muscles, slender . . . a few more scars, but essentially the same despite twelve years as Emperor. Looking up, he glimpsed his face in a shelf mirror -- blue-blue Fremen eyes, mark of spice addiction; a sharp Atreides nose. He looked the proper grandson for an Atreides who'd died in the bullring creating a spectacle for his people.
    Something the old man had said slipped then into Paul's mind: "One who rules assumes irrevocable responsibility for the ruled. You are a husbandman. This demands, at times, a selfless act of love which may only be amusing to those you rule." 
    People still remembered that old man with affection.
    And what have I done for the Atreides name? Paul asked himself. I've loosed the wolf among the sheep.
    For a moment, he contemplated all the death and violence going on in his mind.
    "Into bed now!" Chani said in a sharp tone of command that Paul knew would've shocked his Imperial subjects.
    He obeyed, lay back with his hands behind his head, letting himself be lulled by the pleasant familiarity of Chani's movements.
    The room around them struck him suddenly with amusement. It was not at all what the populace must imagine as the Emperor's bedchamber. The yellow light of restless glowglobes moved the shadows in an array of colored glass jars on a shelf behind Chani. Paul named their contents silently -- the dry ingredients of the desert pharmacopoeia, unguents, incense, mementos . . . a pinch of sand from Sietch Tabr, a lock of hair from their firstborn . . . long dead . . . twelve years dead . . . an innocent bystander killed in the battle that had made Paul Emperor.
    The rich odor of spice-coffee filled the room. Paul inhaled, his glance falling on a yellow bowl beside the tray where Chani was preparing the coffee. The bowl held ground nuts. The inevitable poison-snooper mounted beneath the table waved its insect arms over the food. The snooper angered him. They'd never needed snoopers in the desert days!
    "Coffee's ready," Chani said. "Are you hungry?" 
    His angry denial was drowned in the whistling scream of a spice lighter hurling itself spaceward from the field outside Arrakeen.
    Chani saw his anger, though, poured their coffee, put a cup near his hand. She sat down on the foot of the bed, exposed his legs, began rubbing them where the muscles were knotted from walking in the stillsuit. Softly, with a casual air which did not deceive him, she said: "Let us discuss Irulan's desire for a child."
    Paul's eyes snapped wide open. He studied Chani carefully, "Irulan's been back from Wallach less than two days," he said. "Has she been at you already?" 
    "We've not discussed her frustrations," Chani said.
    Paul forced his mind to mental alertness, examined Chani in the harsh light of observational minutiae, the Bene Gesserit Way his mother had taught him in violation of her vows. It was a thing he didn't like doing with Chani. Part of her hold on him lay in the fact he so seldom needed his tension-building powers with her. Chani mostly avoided indiscreet questions. She maintained a Fremen sense of good manners. Hers were more often practical questions. What interested Chani were facts which bore on the position of her man -- his strength in Council, the loyalty of his legions, the abilities and talents of his allies. Her memory held catalogs of names and cross-indexed details. She could rattle off the major weakness of every known enemy, the potential dispositions of opposing forces, battle plans of their military leaders, the tooling and production capacities of basic industries. 
    Why now, Paul wondered, did she ask about Irulan?
    "I've troubled your mind," Chani said. "That wasn't my intention." 
    "What was your intention?"
    She smiled shyly, meeting his gaze. "If you're angered, love, please don't hide it."
    Paul sank back against the headboard. "Shall I put her away?" he asked. "Her use is limited now and I don't like the things I sense about her trip home to the Sisterhood." 
    "You'll not put her away," Chani said. She went on massaging his legs, spoke matter-of-factly: "You've said many times she's your contact with our enemies, that you can read their plans through her actions."
    "Then why ask about her desire for a child?" 
    "I think it'd disconcert our enemies and put Irulan in a vulnerable position should you make her pregnant." 
    He read by the movements of her hands on his legs what that statement had cost her. A lump rose in his throat. Softly, he said: "Chani, beloved, I swore an oath never to take her into my bed. A child would give her too much power. Would you have her displace you?" 
    "I have no place."
    "Not so, Sihaya, my desert springtime. What is this sudden concern for Irulan?"
    "It's concern for you, not for her! If she carried an Atreides child, her friends would question her loyalties. The less trust our enemies place in her, the less use she is to them."
    "A child for her could mean your death," Paul said. "You know the plotting in this place." A movement of his arm encompassed the Keep.
    "You must have an heir!" she husked. 
    "Ahhh," he said.
    So that was it: Chani had not produced a child for him. Someone else, then, must do it. Why not Irulan? That was the way Chani's mind worked. And it must be done in an act of love because all the Empire avowed strong taboos against artificial ways. Chani had come to a Fremen decision.
    Paul studied her face in this new light. It was a face he knew better in some ways than his own. He had seen this face soft with passion, in the sweetness of sleep, awash in fears and angers and griefs.
    He closed his eyes, and Chani came into his memories as a girl once more -- veiled in springtime, singing, waking from sleep beside him -- so perfect that the very vision of her consumed him. In his memory, she smiled . . . shyly at first, then strained against the vision as though she longed to escape.
    Paul's mouth went dry. For a moment, his nostrils tasted the smoke of a devastated future and the voice of another kind of vision commanding him to disengage . . . disengage . . . disengage. His prophetic visions had been eavesdropping on eternity for such a long while, catching snatches of foreign tongues, listening to stones and to flesh not his own. Since the day of his first encounter with terrible purpose, he had peered at the future, hoping to find peace.
    There existed a way, of course. He knew it by heart without knowing the heart of it -- a rote future, strict in its instructions to him: disengage, disengage, disengage . . . 
    Paul opened his eyes, looked at the decision in Chani's face. She had stopped massaging his legs, sat still now -- purest Fremen. Her features remained familiar beneath the blue nezhoni scarf she often wore about her hair in the privacy of their chambers. But the mask of decision sat on her, an ancient and alien-to-him way of thinking. Fremen women had shared their men for thousands of years -- not always in peace, but with a way of making the fact nondestructive. Something mysteriously Fremen in this fashion had happened in Chani. 
    "You'll give me the only heir I want," he said.
    "You've seen this?" she asked, making it obvious by her emphasis that she referred to prescience.
    As he had done many times, Paul wondered how he could explain the delicacy of the oracle, the Timelines without number which vision waved before him on an undulating fabric. He sighed, remembered water lifted from a river in the hollow of his hands -- trembling, draining. Memory drenched his face in it. How could he drench himself in futures growing increasingly obscure from the pressures of too many oracles? 
    "You've not seen it, then," Chani said.
    That vision-future scarce any longer accessible to him except at the expenditure of life-draining effort, what could it show them except grief? Paul asked himself. He felt that he occupied an inhospitable middle zone, a wasted place where his emotions drifted, swayed, swept outward in unchecked restlessness.
    Chani covered his legs, said: "An heir to House Atreides, this is not something you leave to chance or one woman."
    That was a thing his mother might've said, Paul thought. He wondered if the Lady Jessica had been in secret communication with Chani. His mother would think in terms of House Atreides. It was a pattern bred and conditioned into her by the Bene Gesserit, and would hold true even now when her powers were turned against the Sisterhood.
    "You listened when Irulan came to me today," he accused.
    "I listened." She spoke without looking at him.
    Paul focused his memory on the encounter with Irulan. He'd let himself into the family salon, noted an unfinished robe on Chani's loom. There'd been an acrid wormsmell to the place, an evil odor which almost hid the underlying cinnamon bite of melange. Someone had spilled unchanged spice essence and left it to combine there with a spice-based rug. It had not been a felicitous combination. Spice essence had dissolved the rug. Oily marks lay congealed on the plastone floor where the rug had been. He'd thought to send for someone to clean away the mess, but Harah, Stilgar's wife and Chani's closest feminine friend, had slipped in to announce Irulan.
    He'd been forced to conduct the interview in the presence of that evil smell, unable to escape a Fremen superstition that evil smells foretold disaster. 
    Harah withdrew as Irulan entered. 
    "Welcome," Paul said.
    Irulan wore a robe of gray whale fur. She pulled it close, touched a hand to her hair. He could see her wondering at his mild tone. The angry words she'd obviously prepared for this meeting could be sensed leaving her mind in a welter of second thoughts.
    "You came to report that the Sisterhood had lost its last vestige of morality," he said.
    "Isn't it dangerous to be that ridiculous?" she asked.
    "To be ridiculous and dangerous, a questionable alliance," he said. His renegade Bene Gesserit training detected her putting down an impulse to withdraw. The effort exposed a brief glimpse of underlying fear, and he saw she'd been assigned a task not to her liking.
    "They expect a bit too much from a princess of the blood royal," he said.
    Irulan grew very still and Paul became aware that she had locked herself into a viselike control. A heavy burden, indeed, he thought. And he wondered why prescient visions had given him no glimpse of this possible future.
    Slowly, Irulan relaxed. There was no point in surrendering to fear, no point in retreat, she had decided.
    "You've allowed the weather to fall into a very primitive pattern," she said, rubbing her arms through the robe. "It was dry and there was a sandstorm today. Are you never going to let it rain here?"
    "You didn't come here to talk about the weather," Paul said. He felt that he had been submerged in double meanings. Was Irulan trying to tell him something which her training would not permit her to say openly? It seemed that way. He felt that he had been cast adrift suddenly and now must thrash his way back to some steady place. 
    "I must have a child," she said. 
    He shook his head from side to side.
    "I must have my way!" she snapped. "If need be, I'll find another father for my child. I'll cuckold you and dare you to expose me." 
    "Cuckold me all you wish," he said, "but no child." 
    "How can you stop me?"
    With a smile of upmost kindness, he said: "I'd have you garroted, if it came to that."
    Shocked silence held her for a moment and Paul sensed Chani listened behind the heavy draperies into their private apartments.
    "I am your wife," Irulan whispered.
    "Let us not play these silly games," he said. "You play a part, no more. We both know who my wife is."
    "And I am a convenience, nothing more," she said, voice heavy with bitterness.
    "I have no wish to be cruel to you," he said. 
    "You chose me for this position."
    "Not I," he said. "Fate chose you. Your father chose you. The Bene Gesserit chose you. The Guild chose you. And they have chosen you once more. For what have they chosen you, Irulan?" 
    "Why can't I have your child?" 
    "Because that's a role for which you weren't chosen." 
    "It's my right to bear the royal heir! My father was --" 
    "Your father was and is a beast. We both know he'd lost almost all touch with the humanity he was supposed to rule and protect." 
    "Was he hated less than you're hated?" she flared.
    "A good question," he agreed, a sardonic smile touching the edges of his mouth.
    "You say you've no wish to be cruel to me, yet . . . " 
    "And that's why I agree that you can take any lover you choose. But understand me well: take a lover, but bring no sour-fathered child into my household. I would deny such a child. I don't begrudge you any male alliance as long as you are discreet . . . and childless. I'd be silly to feel otherwise under the circumstances. But don't presume upon this license which I freely bestow. Where the throne is concerned, I control what blood is heir to it. The Bene Gesserit doesn't control this, nor does the Guild. This is one of the privileges I won when I smashed your father's Sardaukar legions out there on the Plain of Arrakeen." 
    "It's on your head, then," Irulan said. She whirled and swept out of the chamber.
    Remembering the encounter now, Paul brought his awareness out of it and focused on Chani seated beside him on their bed. He could understand his ambivalent feelings about Irulan, understand Chani's Fremen decision. Under other circumstances Chani and Irulan might have been friends.
    "What have you decided?" Chani asked.
    "No child," he said.
    Chani made the Fremen crysknife sign with the index finger and thumb of her right hand. 
    "It could come to that," he agreed.
    "You don't think a child would solve anything with Irulan?" she asked.
    "Only a fool would think that." 
    "I am not a fool, my love."
    Anger possessed him. "I've never said you were! But this isn't some damned romantic novel we're discussing. That's a real princess down the hall. She was raised in all the nasty intrigues of an Imperial Court. Plotting is as natural to her as writing her stupid histories!" 
    "They are not stupid, love."
    "Probably not." He brought his anger under control, took her hand in his. "Sorry. But that woman has many plots -- plots within plots. Give into one of her ambitions and you could advance another of them."
    Her voice mild, Chani said: "Haven't I always said as much?"
    "Yes, of course you have." He stared at her. "Then what are you really trying to say to me?"
    She lay down beside him, placed her hand against his neck. "They have come to a decision on how to fight you," she said. "Irulan reeks of secret decisions." 
    Paul stroked her hair.
    Chani had peeled away the dross.
    Terrible purpose brushed him. It was a coriolis wind in his soul. It whistled through the framework of his being. His body knew things then never learned in consciousness.
    "Chani, beloved," he whispered, "do you know what I'd spend to end the Jihad -- to separate myself from the damnable godhead the Qizarate forces onto me?" 
    She trembled. "You have but to command it," she said.
    "Oh, no. Even if I died now, my name would still lead them. When I think of the Atreides name tied to this religious butchery . . . "
    "But you're the Emperor! You've --"
    "I'm a figurehead. When godhead's given, that's the one thing the so-called god no longer controls." A bitter laugh shook him. He sensed the future looking back at him out of dynasties not even dreamed. He felt his being cast out, crying, unchained from the rings of fate -- only his name continued. "I was chosen," he said. "Perhaps at birth . . . certainly before I had much say in it. I was chosen." 
    "Then un-choose," she said.
    His arm tightened around her shoulder. "In time, beloved. Give me yet a little time." 
    Unshed tears burned his eyes.
    "We should return to Sietch Tabr," Chani said. "There's too much to contend with in this tent of stone." 
    He nodded, his chin moving against the smooth fabric of the scarf which covered her hair. The soothing spice smell of her filled his nostrils.
    Sietch. The ancient Chakobsa word absorbed him: a place of retreat and safety in a time of peril. Chani's suggestion made him long for vistas of open sand, for clean distances where one could see an enemy coming from a long way off.
    "The tribes expect Muad'dib to return to them," she said. She lifted her head to look at him. "You belong to us." 
    "I belong to a vision," he whispered.
    He thought then of the Jihad, of the gene mingling across parsecs and the vision which told him how he might end it. Should he pay the price? All the hatefulness would evaporate, dying as fires die -- ember by ember. But . . . oh! The terrifying price!
    I never wanted to be a god, he thought. I wanted only to disappear like a jewel of trace dew caught by the morning. I wanted to escape the angels and the damned -- alone . . . as though by an oversight. 
    "Will we go back to the Sietch?" Chani pressed.
    "Yes," he whispered. And he thought: I must pay the price.
    Chani heaved a deep sigh, settled back against him.
    I've loitered, he thought. And he saw how he'd been hemmed in by boundaries of love and the Jihad. And what was one life, no matter how beloved, against all the lives the Jihad was certain to take? Could single misery be weighed against the agony of multitudes? 
    "Love?" Chani said, questioning. 
    He put a hand against her lips.
    I'll yield up myself, he thought. I'll rush out while I yet have the strength, fly through a space a bird might not find. It was a useless thought, and he knew it. The Jihad would follow his ghost.
    What could he answer? he wondered. How explain when people taxed him with brutal foolishness? Who might understand?
    I wanted only to look back and say: "There! There's an existence which couldn't hold me. See! I vanish! No restraint or net of human devising can trap me ever again. I renounce my religion! This glorious instant is mine! I'm free!" 
    What empty words!
    "A big worm was seen below the Shield Wall yesterday," Chani said. "More than a hundred meters long, they say. Such big ones come rarely into this region any more. The water repels them, I suppose. They say this one came to summon Muad'dib home to his desert." She pinched his chest. "Don't laugh at me!" 
    "I'm not laughing."
    Paul, caught by wonder at the persistent Fremen mythos, felt a heart constriction, a thing inflicted upon his lifeline: adab, the demanding memory. He recalled his childhood room on Caladan then . . . dark night in the stone chamber . . . a vision! It'd been one of his earliest prescient moments. He felt his mind dive into the vision, saw through a veiled cloud-memory (vision-within-vision) a line of Fremen, their robes trimmed with dust. They paraded past a gap in tall rocks. They carried a long, cloth-wrapped burden.
    And Paul heard himself say in the vision: "It was mostly sweet . . . but you were the sweetest of all . . . " 
    Adab released him.
    "You're so quiet," Chani whispered. "What is it?" 
    Paul shuddered, sat up, face averted. "You're angry because I've been to the desert's edge," Chani said. 
    He shook his head without speaking. 
    "I only went because I want a child," Chani said.
    Paul was unable to speak. He felt himself consumed by the raw power of that early vision. Terrible purpose! In that moment, his whole life was a limb shaken by the departure of a bird . . . and the bird was chance. Free will. 
    I succumbed to the lure of the oracle, he thought.
    And he sensed that succumbing to this lure might be to fix himself upon a single-track life. Could it be, he wondered, that the oracle didn't tell the future? Could it be that the oracle made the future? Had he exposed his life to some web of underlying threads, trapped himself there in that long-ago awakening, victim of a spider-future which even now advanced upon him with terrifying jaws.
    A Bene Gesserit axiom slipped into his mind: 'To use raw power is to make yourself infinitely vulnerable to greater powers.'
    "I know it angers you," Chani said, touching his arm. "It's true that the tribes have revived the old rites and the blood sacrifices, but I took no part in those." 
    Paul inhaled a deep, trembling breath. The torrent of his vision dissipated, became a deep, still place whose currents moved with absorbing power beyond his reach.
    "Please," Chani begged. "I want a child, our child. Is that a terrible thing?"
    Paul caressed her arm where she touched him, pulled away. He climbed from the bed, extinguished the glowglobes, crossed to the balcony window, opened the draperies. The deep desert could not intrude here except by its odors. A windowless wall climbed to the night sky across from him. Moonlight slanted down into an enclosed garden, sentinel trees and broad leaves, wet foliage. He could see a fishpond reflecting stars among the leaves, pockets of white floral brilliance in the shadows. Momentarily, he saw the garden through Fremen eyes: alien, menacing, dangerous in its waste of water.
    He thought of the Water Sellers, their way destroyed by the lavish dispensing from his hands. They hated him. He'd slain the past. And there were others, even those who'd fought for the sols to buy precious water, who hated him for changing the old ways. As the ecological pattern dictated by Muad'dib remade the planet's landscape, human resistance increased. Was it not presumptuous, he wondered, to think he could make over an entire planet -- everything growing where and how he told it to grow? Even if he succeeded, what of the universe waiting out there? Did it fear similar treatment?
    Abruptly, he closed the draperies, sealed the ventilators. He turned toward Chani in the darkness, felt her waiting there. Her water rings tinkled like the almsbells of pilgrims. He groped his way to the sound, encountered her outstretched arms.
    "Beloved," she whispered. "Have I troubled you?" 
    Her arms enclosed his future as they enclosed him. 
    "Not you," he said. "Oh . . . not you."

= = = = = =

The advent of the Field Process shield and the lasgun with their explosive interaction, deadly to attacker and attacked, placed the current determinatives, on weapons technology. We need not go into the special role of atomics. The fact that any Family in my Empire could so deploy its atomics as to destroy the planetary bases of fifty or more other Families causes some nervousness, true. But all of us possess precautionary plans for devastating retaliation. Guild and Landsraad contain the keys which hold this force in check, No, my concern goes to the development of humans as special weapons. Here is a virtually unlimited field which a few powers are developing.
-Muad'dib: Lecture to the War College from The Stilgar Chronicle

    The old man stood in his doorway peering out with blue-in-blue eyes. The eyes were veiled by that native suspicion all desert folk held for strangers. Bitter lines tortured the edges of his mouth where it could be seen through a fringe of white beard. He wore no stillsuit and it said much that he ignored this fact in the full knowledge of the moisture pouring from his house through the open door.
    Scytale bowed, gave the greeting signal of the conspiracy.
    From somewhere behind the old man came the sound of a rebec wailing through the atonal dissonance of semuta music. The old man's manner carried no drug dullness, an indication that semuta was the weakness of another. It seemed strange to Scytale, though, to find that sophisticated vice in this place.
    "Greetings from afar," Scytale said, smiling through the flat-featured face he had chosen for this encounter. It occurred to him, then, that this old man might recognize the chosen face. Some of the older Fremen here on Dune had known Duncan Idaho.
    The choice of features, which he had thought amusing, might have been a mistake, Scytale decided. But he dared not change the face out here. He cast nervous glances up and down the street. Would the old man never invite him inside?
    "Did you know my son?" the old man asked.
    That, at least, was one of the countersigns. Scytale made the proper response, all the time keeping his eyes alert for any suspicious circumstance in his surroundings. He did not like his position here. The street was a cul-de-sac ending in this house. The houses all around had been built for veterans of the Jihad. They formed a suburb of Arrakeen which stretched into the Imperial Basin past Tiemag. The walls which hemmed in this street presented blank faces of dun plasmeld broken by dark shadows of sealed doorways and, here and there, scrawled obscenities. Beside this very door someone had chalked a pronouncement that one Beris had brought back to Arrakis a loathsome disease which deprived him of his manhood.
    "Do you come in partnership," the old man asked. 
    "Alone," Scytale said.
    The old man cleared his throat, still hesitating in that maddening way.
    Scytale cautioned himself to patience. Contact in this fashion carried its own dangers. Perhaps the old man knew some reason for carrying on this way. It was the proper hour, though. The pale sun stood almost directly overhead. People of this quarter remained sealed in their houses to sleep through the hot part of the day.
    Was it the new neighbor who bothered the old man? Scytale wondered. The adjoining house, he knew, had been assigned to Otheym, once a member of Muad'dib's dreaded Fedaykin death commandos. And Bijaz, the catalyst-dwarf, waited with Otheym.
    Scytale returned his gaze to the old man, noted the empty sleeve dangling from the left shoulder and the lack of a stillsuit. An air of command hung about this old man. He'd been no foot slogger in the Jihad.
    "May I know the visitor's name?" the old man asked.
    Scytale suppressed a sigh of relief. He was to be accepted, after all. "I am Zaal," he said, giving the name assigned him for this mission.
    "I am Farok," the old man said, "once Bashar of the Ninth Legion in the Jihad. Does this mean anything to you?"
    Scytale read menace in the words, said: "You were born in Sietch Tabr with allegiance to Stilgar." 
    Farok relaxed, stepped aside. "You are welcome in my house."
    Scytale slipped past him into a shadowy atrium -- blue tile floor, glittering designs worked in crystal on the walls. Beyond the atrium was a covered courtyard. Light admitted by translucent filters spread an opalescence as silvery as the white-night of First Moon. The street door grated into its moisture seals behind him.
    "We were a noble people," Farok said, leading the way toward the courtyard. "We were not of the cast-out. We lived in no graben village . . . such as this! We had a proper sietch in the Shield Wall above Habbanya Ridge. One worm could carry us into Kedem, the inner desert." 
    "Not like this," Scytale agreed, realizing now what had brought Farok into the conspiracy. The Fremen longed for the old days and the old ways. 
    They entered the courtyard.
    Farok struggled with an intense dislike for his visitor, Scytale realized. Fremen distrusted eyes that were not the total blue of the Ibad. Offworlders, Fremen said, had unfocused eyes which saw things they were not supposed to see.
    The semuta music had stopped at their entrance. It was replaced now by the strum of a baliset, first a nine-scale chord, then the clear notes of a song which was popular on the Naraj worlds.
    As his eyes adjusted to the light, Scytale saw a youth sitting cross-legged on a low divan beneath arches to his right. The youth's eyes were empty sockets. With that uncanny facility of the blind, he began singing the moment Scytale focused on him. The voice was high and sweet:

"A wind has blown the land away 
And blown the sky away 
And all the men! 
Who is this wind? 
The trees stand unbent, 
Drinking where men drank. 
I've known too many worlds, 
Too many men, 
Too many trees, 
Too many winds."

    Those were not the original words of the song, Scytale noted. Farok led him away from the youth and under the arches on the opposite side, indicated cushions scattered over the tile floor. The tile was worked into designs of sea creatures.
    "There is a cushion once occupied in sietch by Muad'dib," Farok said, indicating a round, black mound. "It is yours now."
    "I am in your debt," Scytale said, sinking to the black mound. He smiled. Farok displayed wisdom. A sage spoke of loyalty even while listening to songs of hidden meaning and words with secret messages. Who could deny the terrifying powers of the tyrant Emperor?
    Inserting his words across the song without breaking the meter, Farok said: "Does my son's music disturb you?"
    Scytale gestured to a cushion facing him, put his back against a cool pillar. "I enjoy music."
    "My son lost his eyes in the conquest of Naraj," Farok said. "He was nursed there and should have stayed. No woman of the people will have him thus. I find it curious, though, to know I have grandchildren on Naraj that I may never see. Do you know the Naraj worlds, Zaal?" 
    "In my youth, I toured there with a troupe of my fellow Face Dancers," Scytale said.
    "You are a Face Dancer, then," Farok said. "I had wondered at your features. They reminded me of a man I knew here once." 
    "Duncan Idaho?" 
    "That one, yes. A swordmaster in the Emperor's pay." 
    "He was killed, so it is said."
    "So it is said," Farok agreed. "Are you truly a man, then? I've heard stories about Face Dancers that . . ." He shrugged.
    "We are Jadacha hermaphrodites," Scytale said, "either sex at will. For the present, I am a man." 
    Farok pursed his lips in thought, then: "May I call for refreshments? Do you desire water? Iced fruit?" 
    "Talk will suffice," Scytale said.
    "The guest's wish is a command," Farok said, settling to the cushion which faced Scytale.
    "Blessed is Abu d' Dhur, Father of the Indefinite Roads of Time," Scytale said. And he thought: There! I've told him straight out that I come from a Guild Steersman and wear the Steersman's conconcealment.
    "Thrice blessed," Farok said, folding his hands into his lap in the ritual clasp. They were old, heavily veined hands.
    "An object seen from a distance betrays only its principle," Scytale said, revealing that he wished to discuss the Emperor's fortress Keep.
    "That which is dark and evil may be seen for evil at any distance," Farok said, advising delay.
    Why? Scytale wondered. But he said: "How did your son lose his eyes?"
    "The Naraj defenders used a stone burner," Farok said. "My son was too close. Cursed atomics! Even the stone burner should be outlawed."
    "It skirts the intent of the law," Scytale agreed. And he thought: A stone burner on Naraj! We weren't told of that. Why does this old man speak of stone burners here?
    "I offered to buy Tleilaxu eyes for him from your masters," Farok said. "But there's a story in the legions that Tleilaxu eyes enslave their users. My son told me that such eyes are metal and he is flesh, that such a union must be sinful."
    "The principle of an object must fit its original intent," Scytale said, trying to turn the conversation back to the information he sought.
    Farok's lips went thin, but he nodded. "Speak openly of what you wish," he said. "We must put our trust in your steersman."
    "Have you ever entered the Imperial Keep?" Scytale asked.
    "I was there for the feast celebrating the Molitor victory. It was cold in all that stone despite the best Ixian space heaters. We slept on the terrace of Alia's Fane the night before. He has trees in there, you know -- trees from many worlds. We Bashars were dressed in our finest green robes and had our tables set apart. We ate and drank too much. I was disgusted with some of the things I saw. The walking wounded came, dragging themselves along on their crutches. I do not think our Muad'dib knows how many men he has maimed."
    "You objected to the feast?" Scytale asked, speaking from a knowledge of the Fremen orgies which were ignited by spice-beer.
    "It was not like the mingling of our souls in the sietch," Farok said. "There was no tau. For entertainment, the troups had slave girls, and the men shared the stories of their battles and their wounds."
    "So you were inside that great pile of stone," Scytale said.
    "Muad'dib came out to us on the terrace," Farok said. " 'Good fortune to us all,' he said. The greeting drill of the desert in that place!"
    "Do you know the location of his private apartments?" Scytale asked.
    "Deep inside," Farok said. "Somewhere deep inside. I am told he and Chani live a nomadic life and that all within the walls of their Keep. Out to the Great Hall he comes for the public audiences. He has reception halls and formal meeting places, a whole wing for his personal guard, places for the ceremonies and an inner section for communications. There is a room far beneath his fortress, I am told, where he keeps a stunted worm surrounded by a water moat with which to poison it. Here is where he reads the future." 
    Myth all tangled up with facts, Scytale thought.
    "The apparatus of government accompanies him everywhere," Farok grumbled. "Clerks and attendants and attendants for the attendants. He trusts only the ones such as Stilgar who were very close to him in the old days." 
    "Not you," Scytale said.
    "I think he has forgotten my existence," Farok said.
    "How does he come and go when he leaves that building?" Scytale asked.
    "He has a tiny 'thopter landing which juts from an inner wall." Farok said. "I am told Muad'dib will not permit another to handle the controls for a landing there. It requires an approach, so it is said, where the slightest miscalculation would plunge him down a sheer cliff of wall into one of his accursed gardens."
    Scytale nodded. This, most likely, was true. Such an aerial entry to the Emperor's quarters would carry a certain measure of security. The Atreides were superb pilots all.
    "He uses men to carry his distrans messages," Farok said. "It demeans men to implant wave translators in them. A man's voice should be his own to command. It should not carry another man's message hidden within its sounds."
    Scytale shrugged. All great powers used the distrans in this age. One could never tell what obstacle might be placed between sender and addressee. The distrans defied political cryptology because it relied on subtle distortions of natural sound patterns which could be scrambled with enormous intricacy.
    "Even his tax officials use this method," Farok complained. "In my day, the distrans was implanted only in the lower animals."
    But revenue information must be kept secret, Scytale thought. More than one government has fallen because people discovered the real extent of official wealth.
    "How do the Fremen cohorts feel now about Muad'dib's Jihad?" Scytale asked. "Do they object to making a god out of their Emperor?"
    "Most of them don't even consider this," Farok said. "They think of the Jihad the way I thought of it -- most of them. It is a source of strange experiences, adventure, wealth. This graben hovel in which I live" -- Farok gestured at the courtyard -- "it cost sixty lidas of spice. Ninety kontars! There was a time when I could not even imagine such riches." He shook his head.
    Across the courtyard, the blind youth took up the notes of a love ballad on his baliset.
    Ninety kontars, Scytale thought. How strange. Great riches, certainly. Farok's hovel would be a palace on many another world, but all things were relative -- even the kontar. Did Farok, for example, know whence came his measure for this weight of spice? Did he ever think to himself that one and a half kontar once limited a camel load? Not likely. Farok might never even have heard of a camel or of the Golden Age of Earth.
    His words oddly in rhythm to the melody of his son's baliset, Farok said: "I owned a crysknife, water rings to ten liters, my own lance which had been my father's, a coffee service, a bottle made of red glass older than any memory in my sietch. I had my own share of our spice, but no money. I was rich and did not know it. Two wives I had: one plain and dear to me, the other stupid and obstinate, but with form and face of an angel. I was a Fremen Naib, a rider of worms, master of the leviathan and of the sand."
    The youth across the courtyard picked up the beat of his melody.
    "I knew many things without the need to think about them," Farok said. "I knew there was water far beneath our sand, held there in bondage by the Little Makers. I knew that my ancestors sacrificed virgins to Shai-hulud . . . before Liet-Kynes made us stop. I had seen the jewels in the mouth of a worm. My soul had four gates and I knew them all." 
    He fell silent, musing.
    "Then the Atreides came with his witch mother," Scytale said.
    "The Atreides came," Farok agreed. "The one we named Usul in our sietch, his private name among us. Our Muad'dib, our Mahdi! And when he called for the Jihad, I was one of those who asked: 'Why should I go to fight there? I have no relatives there.' But other men went -- young men, friends, companions of my childhood. When they returned, they spoke of wizardry, of the power in this Atreides savior. He fought our enemy, the Harkonnen. Liet-Kynes, who had promised us a paradise upon our planet, blessed him. It was said this Atreides came to change our world and our universe, that he was the man to make the golden flower blossom in the night."
    Farok held up his hands, examined the palms. "Men pointed to First Moon and said: 'His soul is there.' Thus, he was called Muad'dib. I did not understand all this."
    He lowered his hands, stared across the courtyard at his son. "I had no thoughts in my head. There were thoughts only in my heart and my belly and my loins." 
    Again, the tempo of the background music increased.
    "Do you know why I enlisted in the Jihad?" The old eyes stared hard at Scytale. "I heard there was a thing called a sea. It is very hard to believe in a sea when you have lived only here among our dunes. We have no seas. Men of Dune had never known a sea. We had our windtraps. We collected water for the great change Liet-Kynes promised us . . . this great change Muad'dib is bringing with a wave of his hand. I could imagine a qanat, water flowing across the land in a canal. From this, my mind could picture a river. But a sea?"
    Farok gazed at the translucent cover of his courtyard as though trying to probe into the universe beyond. "A sea," he said, voice low. "It was too much for my mind to picture. Yet, men I knew said they had seen this marvel. I thought they lied, but I had to know for myself. It was for this reason that I enlisted."
    The youth struck a loud final chord on the baliset, took up a new song with an oddly undulating rhythm. 
    "Did you find your sea?" Scytale asked.
    Farok remained silent and Scytale thought the old man had not heard. The baliset music rose around them and fell like a tidal movement. Farok breathed to its rhythm.
    "There was a sunset," Farok said presently. "One of the elder artists might have painted such a sunset. It had red in it the color of the glass in my bottle. There was gold . . . blue. It was on the world they call Enfeil, the one where I led my legion to victory. We came out of a mountain pass where the air was sick with water. I could scarcely breathe it. And there below me was the thing my friends had told me about: water as far as I could see and farther. We marched down to it. I waded out into it and drank. It was bitter and made me ill. But the wonder of it has never left me." 
    Scytale found himself sharing the old Fremen's awe.
    "I immersed myself in that sea," Farok said, looking down at the water creatures worked into the tiles of his floor. "One man sank beneath that water . . . another man arose from it. I felt that I could remember a past which had never been. I stared around me with eyes which could accept anything . . . anything at all. I saw a body in the water -- one of the defenders we had slain. There was a log nearby supported on that water, a piece of a great tree. I can close my eyes now and see that log. It was black on one end from a fire. And there was a piece of cloth in that water -- no more than a yellow rag . . . torn, dirty. I looked at all these things and I understood why they had come to this place. It was for me to see them."
    Farok turned slowly, stared into Scytale's eyes. "The universe is unfinished, you know," he said.
    This one is garrulous, but deep, Scytale thought. And he said: "I can see it made a profound impression on you." 
    "You are a Tleilaxu," Farok said. "You have seen many seas. I have seen only this one, yet I know a thing about seas which you do not."
    Scytale found himself in the grip of an odd feeling of disquiet.
    "The Mother of Chaos was born in a sea," Farok said. "A Qizara Tafwid stood nearby when I came dripping from that water. He had not entered the sea. He stood on the sand . . . it was wet sand . . . with some of my men who shared his fear. He watched me with eyes that knew I had learned something which was denied to him. I had become a sea creature and I frightened him. The sea healed me of the Jihad and I think he saw this." 
    Scytale realized that somewhere in this recital the music had stopped. He found it disturbing that he could not place the instant when the baliset had fallen silent.
    As though it were relevant to what he'd been recounting, Farok said: "Every gate is guarded. There's no way into the Emperor's fortress." 
    "That's its weakness," Scytale said. 
    Farok stretched his neck upward, peering.
    "There's a way in," Scytale explained. "The fact that most men -- including, we may hope, the Emperor -- believe otherwise . . . that's to our advantage." He rubbed his lips, feeling the strangeness of the visage he'd chosen. The musician's silence bothered him. Did it mean Farok's son was through transmitting? That had been the way of it, naturally: The message condensed and transmitted within the music. It had been impressed upon Scytale's own neutral system, there to be triggered at the proper moment by the distrans embedded in his adrenal cortex. If it was ended, he had become a container of unknown words. He was a vessel sloshing with data: every cell of the conspiracy here on Arrakis, every name, every contact phrase -- all the vital information.
    With this information, they could brave Arrakis, capture a sandworm, begin the culture of melange somewhere beyond Muad'dib's writ. They could break the monopoly as they broke Muad'dib. They could do many things with this information.
    "We have the woman here," Farok said. "Do you wish to see her now?"
    "I've seen her," Scytale said. "I've studied her with care. Where is she?" 
    Farok snapped his fingers.
    The youth took up his rebec, drew the bow across it. Semuta music wailed from the strings. As though drawn by the sound, a young woman in a blue robe emerged from a doorway behind the musician. Narcotic dullness filled her eyes which were the total blue of the Ibad. She was a Fremen, addicted to the spice, and now caught by an offworld vice. Her awareness lay deep within the semuta, lost somewhere and riding the ecstasy of the music.
    "Otheym's daughter," Farok said. "My son gave her the narcotic in the hope of winning a woman of the People for himself despite his blindness. As you can see, his victory is empty. Semuta has taken what he hoped to gain." 
    "Her father doesn't know?" Scytale asked.
    "She doesn't even know," Farok said. "My son supplies false memories with which she accounts to herself for her visits. She thinks herself in love with him. This is what her family believes. They are outraged because he is not a complete man, but they won't interfere, of course." 
    The music trailed away to silence.
    At a gesture from the musician, the young woman seated herself beside him, bent close to listen as he murmured to her.
    "What will you do with her?" Farok asked.
    Once more, Scytale studied the courtyard. "Who else is in this house?" he asked.
    "We are all here now," Farok said. "You've not told me what you'll do with the woman. It is my son who wishes to know."
    As though about to answer, Scytale extended his right arm. From the sleeve of his robe, a glistening needle darted, embedded itself in Farok's neck. There was no outcry, no change of posture. Farok would be dead in a minute, but he sat unmoving, frozen by the dart's poison.
    Slowly, Scytale climbed to his feet, crossed to the blind musician. The youth was still murmuring to the young woman when the dart whipped into him.
    Scytale took the young woman's arm, urged her gently to her feet, shifted his own appearance before she looked at him. She came erect, focused on him. 
    "What is it, Farok?" she asked.
    "My son is tired and must rest," Scytale said. "Come. We'll go out the back way."
    "We had such a nice talk," she said. "I think I've convinced him to get Tleilaxu eyes. It'd make a man of him again."
    "Haven't I said it many times?" Scytale asked, urging her into a rear chamber.
    His voice, he noted with pride, matched his features precisely. It unmistakably was the voice of the old Fremen, who certainly was dead by this time.
    Scytale sighed. It had been done with sympathy, he told himself, and the victims certainly had known their peril. Now, the young woman would have to be given her chance.

= = = = = =

Empires do not suffer emptiness of purpose at the time of their creation. It is when they have become established that aims are lost and replaced by vague ritual.
-Words of Muad'dib by Princess Irulan.

    It was going to be a bad session, this meeting of the Imperial Council, Alia realized. She sensed contention gathering force, storing up energy -- the way Irulan refused to look at Chani, Stilgar's nervous shuffling of papers, the scowls Paul directed at Korba the Qizara.
    She seated herself at the end of the golden council table so she could look out the balcony windows at the dusty light of the afternoon.
    Korba, interrupted by her entrance, went on with something he'd been saying to Paul. "What I mean, m'Lord, is that there aren't as many gods as once there were."
    Alia laughed, throwing her head back. The movement dropped the black hood of her aba robe. Her features lay exposed -- blue-in-blue "spice eyes," her mother's oval face beneath a cap of bronze hair, small nose, mouth wide and generous.
    Korba's cheeks went almost the color of his orange robe. He glared at Alia, an angry gnome, bald and fuming.
    "Do you know what's being said about your brother?" he demanded.
    "I know what's being said about your Qizarate," Alia countered. "You're not divines, you're god's spies." 
    Korba glanced at Paul for support, said: "We are sent by the writ of Muad'dib, that He shall know the truth of His people and they shall know the truth of Him." 
    "Spies," Alia said.
    Korba pursed his lips in injured silence.
    Paul looked at his sister, wondering why she provoked Korba. Abruptly, he saw that Alia had passed into womanhood, beautiful with the first blazing innocence of youth. He found himself surprised that he hadn't noticed it until this moment. She was fifteen -- almost sixteen, a Reverend Mother without motherhood, virgin priestess, object of fearful veneration for the superstitious masses -- Alia of the Knife.
    "This is not the time or place for your sister's levity," Irulan said.
    Paul ignored her, nodded to Korba. "The square's full of pilgrims. Go out and lead their prayer." 
    "But they expect you, m'Lord," Korba said.
    "Put on your turban," Paul said. "They'll never know at this distance."
    Irulan smothered irritation at being ignored, watched Korba arise to obey. She'd had the sudden disquieting thought that Edric might not hide her actions from Alia. What do we really know of the sister? she wondered.
    Chani, hands tightly clasped in her lap, glanced across the table at Stilgar, her uncle, Paul's Minister of State. Did the old Fremen Naib ever long for the simpler life of his desert sietch? she wondered. Stilgar's black hair, she noted, had begun to gray at the edges, but his eyes beneath heavy brows remained far-seeing. It was the eagle stare of the wild, and his beard still carried the catchtube indentation of life in a stillsuit.
    Made nervous by Chani's attention, Stilgar looked around the Council Chamber. His gaze fell on the balcony window and Korba standing outside. Korba raised outstretched arms for the benediction and a trick of the afternoon sun cast a red halo onto the window behind him. For a moment, Stilgar saw the Court Qizara as a figure crucified on a fiery wheel. Korba lowered his arms, destroyed the illusion, but Stilgar remained shaken by it. His thoughts went in angry frustration to the fawning supplicants waiting in the Audience Hall, and to the hateful pomp which surrounded Muad'dib's throne.
    Convening with the Emperor, one hoped for a fault in him, to find mistakes, Stilgar thought. He felt this might be sacrilege, but wanted it anyway.
    Distant crowd murmuring entered the chamber as Korba returned. The balcony door thumped into its seals behind him, shutting off the sound.
    Paul's gaze followed the Qizara. Korba took his seat at Paul's left, dark features composed, eyes glazed by fanaticism. He'd enjoyed that moment of religious power. 
    "The spirit presence has been invoked," he said. 
    "Thank the lord for that," Alia said. 
    Korba's lips went white.
    Again, Paul studied his sister, wondered at her motives. Her innocence masked deception, he told himself. She'd come out of the same Bene Gesserit breeding program as he had. What had the kwisatz haderach genetics produced in her? There was always that mysterious difference: she'd been an embryo in the womb when her mother had survived the raw melange poison. Mother and unborn daughter had become Reverend Mothers simultaneously. But simultaneity didn't carry identity.
    Of the experience, Alia said that in one terrifying instant she had awakened to consciousness, her memory absorbing the uncounted other-lives which her mother was assimilating.
    "I became my mother and all the others," she said. "I was unformed, unborn, but I became an old woman then and there."
    Sensing his thoughts on her, Alia smiled at Paul. His expression softened. How could anyone react to Korba with other than cynical humor? he asked himself. What is more ridiculous than a Death Commando transformed into a priest?
    Stilgar tapped his papers, "if my liege permits," he said. "These are matters urgent and dire." 
    "The Tupile Treaty?" Paul asked.
    "The Guild maintains that we must sign this treaty without knowing the precise location of the Tupile Entente," Stilgar said. "They've some support from Landsraad delegates."
    "What pressures have you brought to bear?" Irulan asked.
    "Those pressures which my Emperor has designated for this enterprise," Stilgar said. The stiff formality of his reply contained all his disapproval of the Princess Consort.
    "My Lord and husband," Irulan said, turning to Paul, forcing him to acknowledge her.
    Emphasizing the titular difference in front of Chani, Paul thought, is a weakness. In such moments, he shared Stiliar's dislike for Irulan, but sympathy tempered his emotions. What was Irulan but a Bene Gesserit pawn? 
    "Yes?" Paul said.
    Irulan stared at him. "If you withheld their melange . . ."
    Chani shook her head in dissent.
    "We tread with caution," Paul said. "Tupile remains the place of sanctuary for defeated Great Houses. It symbolizes a last resort, a final place of safety for all our subjects. Exposing the sanctuary makes it vulnerable." 
    "If they can hide people they can hide other things," Stilgar rumbled. "An army, perhaps, or the beginnings of melange culture which --"
    "You don't back people into a corner," Alia said. "Not if you want them to remain peaceful." Ruefully, she saw that she'd been drawn into the contention which she'd foreseen.
    "So we've spent ten years of negotiation for nothing," Irulan said.
    "None of my brother's actions is for nothing," Alia said.
    Irulan picked up a scribe, gripped it with white-knuckled intensity. Paul saw her marshal emotional control in the Bene Gesserit way: the penetrating inward stare, deep breathing. He could almost hear her repeating the litany. Presently, she said: "What have we gained?" 
    "We've kept the Guild off balance," Chani said.
    "We want to avoid a showdown confrontation with our enemies," Alia said. "We have no special desire to kill them. There's enough butchery going on under the Atreides banner."
    She feels it, too, Paul thought. Strange, what a sense of compelling responsibility they both felt for that brawling, idolatrous universe with its ecstasies of tranquility and wild motion. Must we protect them from themselves? he wondered. They play with nothingness every moment -- empty lives, empty words. They ask too much of me. His throat felt tight and full. How many moments would he lose? What sons? What dreams? Was it worth the price his vision had revealed? Who would ask the living of some far distant future, who would say to them: "But for Muad'dib, you would not be here."
    "Denying them their melange would solve nothing," Chani said. "So the Guild's navigators would lose their ability to see into timespace. Your Sisters of the Bene Gesserit would lose their truthsense. Some people might die before their time. Communication would break down. Who could be blamed?" 
    "They wouldn't let it come to that," Irulan said.
    "Wouldn't they?" Chani asked. "Why not? Who could blame the Guild? They'd be helpless, demonstrably so." 
    "We'll sign the treaty as it stands," Paul said.
    "M'Lord," Stilgar said, concentrating on his hands, "there is a question in our minds." 
    "Yes?" Paul gave the old Fremen his full attention.
    "You have certain . . . powers," Stilgar said. "Can you not locate the Entente despite the Guild?"
    Powers! Paul thought. Stilgar couldn't just say: "You're prescient. Can't you trace a path in the future that leads to Tupile?"
    Paul looked at the golden surface of the table. Always the same problem: How could he express the limits of the inexpressible? Should he speak of fragmentation, the natural destiny of all power? How could someone who'd never experienced the spice change of prescience conceive an awareness containing no localized spacetime, no personal image-vector nor associated sensory captives?
    He looked at Alia, found her attention on Irulan. Alia sensed his movement, glanced at him, nodded toward Irulan. Ahhh, yes: any answer they gave would find its way into one of Irulan's special reports to the Bene Gesserit. They never gave up seeking an answer to their kwisatz haderach.
    Stilgar, though, deserved an answer of some kind. For that matter, so did Irulan.
    "The uninitiated try to conceive of prescience as obeying a Natural Law," Paul said. He steepled his hands in front of him. "But it'd be just as correct to say it's heaven speaking to us, that being able to read the future is a harmonious act of man's being. In other words, prediction is a natural consequence in the wave of the present. It wears the guise of nature, you see. But such powers cannot be used from an attitude that prestates aims and purposes. Does a chip caught in the wave say where it's going? There's no cause and effect in the oracle. Causes become occasions of convections and confluences, places where the currents meet. Accepting prescience, you fill your being with concepts repugnant to the intellect. Your intellectual consciousness, therefore, rejects them. In rejecting, intellect becomes a part of the processes, and is subjugated." 
    "You cannot do it?" Stilgar asked.
    "Were I to seek Tupile with prescience," Paul said, speaking directly to Irulan, "this might hide Tupile." 
    "Chaos!" Irulan protested. "It has no . . . no . . . consistency." 
    "I did say it obeys no Natural Law," Paul said.
    "Then there are limits to what you can see or do with your powers?" Irulan asked.
    Before Paul could answer, Alia said: "Dear Irulan, prescience has no limits. Not consistent? Consistency isn't a necessary aspect of the universe." 
    "But he said . . ."
    "How can my brother give you explicit information about the limits of something which has no limits? The boundaries escape the intellect."
    That was a nasty thing for Alia to do, Paul thought. It would alarm Irulan, who had such a careful consciousness, so dependent upon values derived from precise limits. His gaze went to Korba, who sat in a pose of religious reverie -- listening with the soul. How could the Qizarate use this exchange? More religious mystery? Something to evoke awe? No doubt.
    "Then you'll sign the treaty in its present form?" Stilgar asked.
    Paul smiled. The issue of the oracle, by Stilgar's judgment, had been closed. Stilgar aimed only at victory, not at discovering truth. Peace, justice and a sound coinage -- these anchored Stilgar's universe. He wanted something visible and real -- a signature on a treaty.
    "I'll sign it," Paul said.
    Stilgar took up a fresh folder. "The latest communication from our field commanders in Sector Ixian speaks of agitation for a constitution." The old Fremen glanced at Chani, who shrugged.
    Irulan, who had closed her eyes and put both hands to her forehead in mnemonic impressment, opened her eyes, studied Paul intently.
    "The Ixian Confederacy offers submission," Stilgar said, "but their negotiators question the amount of the Imperial Tax which they --"
    "They want a legal limit to my Imperial will," Paul said. "Who would govern me, the Landsraad or CHOAM?"
    Stilgar removed from the folder a note on instroy paper. "One of our agents sent this memorandum from a caucus of the CHOAM minority." He read the cipher in a flat voice: "The Throne must be stopped in its attempt at a power monopoly. We must tell the truth about the Atreides, how he maneuvers behind the triple sham of Landsraad legislation, religious sanction and bureaucratic efficiency." He pushed the note back into the folder. 
    "A constitution," Chani murmured.
    Paul glanced at her, back to Stilgar. Thus the Jihad falters, Paul thought, but not soon enough to save me. The thought produced emotional tensions. He remembered his earliest visions of the Jihad-to-be, the terror and revulsion he'd experienced. Now, of course, he knew visions of greater terrors. He had lived with the real violence. He had seen his Fremen, charged with mystical strength, sweep all before them in the religious war. The Jihad gained a new perspective. It was finite, of course, a brief spasm when measured against eternity, but beyond lay horrors to overshadow anything in the past. 
    All in my name, Paul thought.
    "Perhaps they could be given the form of a constitution," Chani suggested. "It needn't be actual." 
    "Deceit is a tool of statecraft," Irulan agreed.
    "There are limits to power, as those who put their hopes in a constitution always discover," Paul said. 
    Korba straightened from his reverent pose. "M'Lord?" 
    "Yes?" And Paul thought. Here now! Here's one who may harbor secret sympathies for an imagined rule of Law.
    "We could begin with a religious constitution," Korba said, "something for the faithful who --"
    "No!" Paul snapped. "We will make this an Order in Council. Are you recording this, Irulan?"
    "Yes, m'Lord," Irulan said, voice frigid with dislike for the menial role he forced upon her.
    "Constitutions become the ultimate tyranny," Paul said. "They're organized power on such a scale as to be overwhelming. The constitution is social power mobilized and it has no conscience. It can crush the highest and the lowest, removing all dignity and individuality. It has an unstable balance point and no limitations. I, however, have limitations. In my desire to provide an ultimate protection for my people, I forbid a constitution. Order in Council, this date, etcetera, etcetera."
    "What of the Ixian concern about the tax, m'Lord?" Stilgar asked.
    Paul forced his attention away from the brooding, angry look on Korba's face, said: "You've a proposal, Stil?" 
    "We must have control of taxes, Sire."
    "Our price to the Guild for my signature on the Tupile Treaty," Paul said, "is the submission of the Ixian Confederacy to our tax. The Confederacy cannot trade without Guild transport. They'll pay."
    "Very good, m'Lord." Stilgar produced another folder, cleared his throat. "The Qizarate's report on Salusa Secundus. Irulan's father has been putting his legions through landing maneuvers."
    Irulan found something of interest in the palm of her left hand. A pulse throbbed at her neck.
    "Irulan," Paul asked, "do you persist in arguing that your father's one legion is nothing more than a toy?" 
    "What could he do with only one legion?" she asked. She stared at him out of slitted eyes. 
    "He could get himself killed," Chani said. 
    Paul nodded. "And I'd be blamed."
    "I know a few commanders in the Jihad," Alia said, "who'd pounce if they learned of this." 
    "But it's only his police force!" Irulan protested.
    "Then they have no need for landing maneuvers," Paul said. "I suggest that your next little note to your father contain a frank and direct discussion of my views about his delicate position."
    She lowered her gaze. "Yes, m'Lord. I hope that will be the end of it. My father would make a good martyr." 
    "Mmmmmm," Paul said. "My sister wouldn't send a message to those commanders she mentioned unless I ordered it."
    "An attack on my father carries dangers other than the obvious military ones," Irulan said. "People are beginning to look back on his reign with a certain nostalgia." 
    "You'll go too far one day," Chani said in her deadly serious Fremen voice. 
    "Enough!" Paul ordered.
    He weighed Irulan's revelation about public nostalgia -- ah, now! that'd carried a note of truth. Once more, Irulan had proved her worth.
    "The Bene Gesserit send a formal supplication," Stilgar said, presenting another folder. "They wish to consult you about the preservation of your bloodline." 
    Chani glanced sideways at the folder as though it contained a deadly device.
    "Send the Sisterhood the usual excuses," Paul said. 
    "Must we?" Irulan demanded.
    "Perhaps . . . this is the time to discuss it," Chani said.
    Paul shook his head sharply. They couldn't know that this was part of the price he had not yet decided to pay.
    But Chani wasn't to be stopped. "I have been to the prayer wall of Sietch Tabr where I was born," she said. "I have submitted to doctors. I have knelt in the desert and sent my thoughts into the depths where dwells Shai-hulud. Yet" -- she shrugged -- "nothing avails."
    Science and superstition, all have failed her, Paul thought. Do I fail her, too, by not telling her what bearing an heir to House Atreides will precipitate? He looked up to find an expression of pity in Alia's eyes. The idea of pity from his sister repelled him. Had she, too, seen that terrifying future?
    "My Lord must know the dangers to his realm when he has no heir," Irulan said, using her Bene Gesserit powers of voice with an oily persuasiveness. "These things are naturally difficult to discuss, but they must be brought into the open. An Emperor is more than a man. His figure leads the realm. Should he die without an heir, civil strife must follow. As you love your people, you cannot leave them thus?"
    Paul pushed himself away from the table, strode to the balcony windows. A wind was flattening the smoke of the city's fires out there. The sky presented a darkening silver-blue softened by the evening fall of dust from the Shield Wall. He stared southward at the escarpment which protected his northern lands from the coriolis wind, and he wondered why his own peace of mind could find no such shield.
    The Council sat silently waiting behind him, aware of how close to rage he was.
    Paul sensed time rushing upon him. He tried to force himself into a tranquility of many balances where he might shape a new future.
    Disengage . . . disengage . . . disengage, he thought. What would happen if he took Chani, just picked up and left with her, sought sanctuary on Tupile? His name would remain behind. The Jihad would find new and more terrible centers upon which to turn. He'd be blamed for that, too. He felt suddenly fearful that in reaching for any new thing he might let fall what was most precious, that even the slightest noise from him might send the universe crashing back, receding until he never could recapture any piece of it.
    Below him, the square had become the setting for a band of pilgrims in the green and white of the hajj. They wended their way like a disjointed snake behind a striding Arrakeen guide. They reminded Paul that his reception hall would be packed with supplicants by now. Pilgrims! Their exercise in homelessness had become a disgusting source of wealth for his Imperium. The hajj filled the spaceways with religious tramps. They came and they came and they came.
    How did I set this in motion? he asked himself.
    It had, of course, set itself in motion. It was in the genes which might labor for centuries to achieve this brief spasm.
    Driven by that deepest religious instinct, the people came, seeking their resurrection. The pilgrimage ended here -- "Arrakis, the place of rebirth, the place to die." 
    Snide old Fremen said he wanted the pilgrims for their water.
    What was it the pilgrims really sought? Paul wondered. They said they came to a holy place. But they must know the universe contained no Eden-source, no Tupile for the soul. They called Arrakis the place of the unknown where all mysteries were explained. This was a link between their universe and the next. And the frightening thing was that they appeared to go away satisfied.
    What do they find here? Paul asked himself.
    Often in their religious ecstasy, they filled the streets with screeching like some odd aviary. In fact, the Fremen called them "passage birds." And the few who died here were "winged souls."
    With a sigh, Paul thought how each new planet his legions subjugated opened new sources of pilgrims. They came out of gratitude for "the peace of Muad'dib."
    Everywhere there is peace, Paul thought. Everywhere . . . except in the heart of Muad'dib.
    He felt that some element of himself lay immersed in frosty hoar-darkness without end. His prescient power had tampered with the image of the universe held by all mankind. He had shaken the safe cosmos and replaced security with his Jihad. He had out-fought and out-thought and out-predicted the universe of men, but a certainty filled him that this universe still eluded him.
    This planet beneath him which he had commanded be remade from desert into a water-rich paradise, it was alive. It had a pulse as dynamic as that of any human. It fought him, resisted, slipped away from his commands . . .
    A hand crept into Paul's. He looked down to see Chani peering up at him, concern in her eyes. Those eyes drank him, and she whispered: "Please, love, do not battle with your ruh-self." An outpouring of emotion swept upward from her hand, buoyed him. 
    "Sihaya," he whispered.
    "We must go to the desert soon," she said in a low voice.
    He squeezed her hand, released it, returned to the table where he remained standing. 
    Chani took her seat.
    Irulan stared at the papers in front of Stilgar, her mouth a tight line.
    "Irulan proposes herself as mother of the Imperial heir," Paul said. He glanced at Chani, back to Irulan, who refused to meet his gaze. "We all know she holds no love for me." 
    Irulan went very still.
    "I know the political arguments," Paul said. "It's the human arguments which concern me. I think if the Princess Consort were not bound by the commands of the Bene Gesserit, if she did not seek this out of desires for personal power, my reaction might be very different. As matters stand, though, I reject this proposal." 
    Irulan took a deep, shaky breath.
    Paul, resuming his seat, thought he had never seen her under such poor control. Leaning toward her, he said: "Irulan, I am truly sorry."
    She lifted her chin, a look of pure fury in her eyes. "I don't want your pity!" she hissed. And turning to Stilgar: "Is there more that's urgent and dire?"
    Holding his gaze firmly on Paul, Stilgar said: "One more matter, m'Lord. The Guild again proposes a formal embassy here on Arrakis."
    "One of the deep-space kind?" Korba asked, his voice full of fanatic loathing.
    "Presumably," Stilgar said.
    "A matter to be considered with the utmost care, m'Lord," Korba warned. "The Council of Naibs would not like it, an actual Guildsman here on Arrakis. They contaminate the very ground they touch."
    "They live in tanks and don't touch the ground," Paul said, letting his voice reveal irritation.
    "The Naibs might take matters into their own hands, m'Lord," Korba said. 
    Paul glared at him.
    "They are Fremen, after all, m'Lord," Korba insisted. "We well remember how the Guild brought those who oppressed us. We have not forgotten the way they blackmailed a spice ransom from us to keep our secrets from our enemies. They drained us of every --" 
    "Enough!" Paul snapped. "Do you think I have forgotten?"
    As though he had just awakened to the import of his own words, Korba stuttered unintelligibly, then: "M'lord, forgive me. I did not mean to imply you are not Fremen. I did not . . ."
    "They'll send a Steersman," Paul said. "It isn't likely a Steersman would come here if he could see danger in it." 
    Her mouth dry with sudden fear, Irulan said: "You've . . . seen a Steersman come here?"
    "Of course I haven't seen a Steersman," Paul said, mimicking her tone. "But I can see where one's been and where one's going. Let them send us a Steersman. Perhaps I have a use for such a one." 
    "So ordered," Stilgar said.
    And Irulan, hiding a smile behind her hand, thought: It's true then. Our Emperor cannot see a Steersman. They are mutually blind. The conspiracy is hidden.

= = = = = =

"Once more the drama begins."
-The Emperor Paul Muad'dib on his ascension to the Lion Throne

    Alia peered down from her spy window into the great reception hall to watch the advance of the Guild entourage.
    The sharply silver light of noon poured through clerestory windows onto a floor worked in green, blue and eggshell tiles to simulate a bayou with water plants and, here and there, a splash of exotic color to indicate bird or animal.
    Guildsmen moved across the tile pattern like hunters stalking their prey in a strange jungle. They formed a moving design of gray robes, black robes, orange robes -- all arrayed in a deceptively random way around the transparent tank where the Steersman-Ambassador swam in his orange gas. The tank slid on its supporting field, towed by two gray-robed attendants, like a rectangular ship being warped into its dock.
    Directly beneath her, Paul sat on the Lion Throne on its raised dais. He wore the new formal crown with its fish and fist emblems. The jeweled golden robes of state covered his body. The shimmering of a personal shield surrounded him. Two wings of bodyguards fanned out on both sides along the dais and down the steps. Stilgar stood two steps below Paul's right hand in a white robe with a yellow rope for a belt.
    Sibling empathy told her that Paul seethed with the same agitation she was experiencing, although she doubted another could detect it. His attention remained on an orange-robed attendant whose blindly staring metal eyes looked neither to right nor to left. This attendant walked at the right front corner of the Ambassador's troupe like a military outrider. A rather flat face beneath curly black hair, such of his figure as could be seen beneath the orange robe, every gesture shouted a familiar identity. 
    It was Duncan Idaho.
    It could not be Duncan Idaho, yet it was.
    Captive memories absorbed in the womb during the moment of her mother's spice change identified this man for Alia by a rihani decipherment which cut through all camouflage. Paul was seeing him, she knew, out of countless personal experiences, out of gratitudes and youthful sharing. 
    It was Duncan.
    Alia shuddered. There could be only one answer: this was a Tleilaxu ghola, a being reconstructed from the dead flesh of the original. That original had perished saving Paul. This could only be a product of the axolotl tanks.
    The ghola walked with the cock-footed alertness of a master swordsman. He came to a halt as the Ambassador's tank glided to a stop ten paces from the steps of the dais.
    In the Bene Gesserit way she could not escape, Alia read Paul's disquiet. He no longer looked at the figure out of his past. Not looking, his whole being stared. Muscles strained against restrictions as he nodded to the Guild Ambassador, said: "I am told your name is Edric. We welcome you to our Court in the hope this will bring new understanding between us."
    The Steersman assumed a sybaritic reclining pose in his orange gas, popped a melange capsule into his mouth before meeting Paul's gaze. The tiny transducer orbiting a corner of the Guildsman's tank reproduced a coughing sound, then the rasping, uninvolved voice: "I abase myself before my Emperor and beg leave to present my credentials and offer a small gift."
    An aide passed a scroll up to Stilgar, who studied it, scowling, then nodded to Paul. Both Stilgar and Paul turned then toward the ghola standing patiently below the dais.
    "Indeed my Emperor has discerned the gift," Edric said.
    "We are pleased to accept your credentials," Paul said. "Explain the gift."
    Edric rolled in the tank, bringing his attention to bear on the ghola. "This is a man called Hayt," he said, spelling the name. "According to our investigators, he has a most curious history. He was killed here on Arrakis . . . a grievous head-wound which required many months of regrowth. The body was sold to the Bene Tleilax as that of a master swordsman, an adept of the Ginaz School. It came to our attention that this must be Duncan Idaho, the trusted retainer of your household. We bought him as a gift befitting an Emperor." Edric peered up at Paul. "Is it not Idaho, Sire?"
    Restraint and caution gripped Paul's voice. "He has the aspect of Idaho."
    Does Paul see something I don't? Alia wondered. No! It's Duncan!
    The man called Hayt stood impassively, metal eyes fixed straight ahead, body relaxed. No sign escaped him to indicate he knew himself to be the object of discussion.
    "According to our best knowledge, it's Idaho," Edric said.
    "He's called Hayt now," Paul said. "A curious name." 
    "Sire, there's no divining how or why the Tleilaxu bestow names," Edric said. "But names can be changed. The Tleilaxu name is of little importance." 
    This is a Tleilaxu thing, Paul thought. There's the problem. The Bene Tleilax held little attachment to phenomenal nature. Good and evil carried strange meanings in their philosophy. What might they have incorporated in Idaho's flesh -- out of design or whim?
    Paul glanced at Stilgar, noted the Fremen's superstitious awe. It was an emotion echoed all through his Fremen guard. Stilgar's mind would be speculating about the loathsome habits of Guildsmen, of Tleilaxu and of gholas.
    Turning toward the ghola, Paul said: "Hayt, is that your only name?"
    A serene smile spread over the ghola's dark features. The metal eyes lifted, centered on Paul, but maintained their mechanical stare. "That is how I am called, my Lord: Hayt."
    In her dark spy hole, Alia trembled. It was Idaho's voice, a quality of sound so precise she sensed its imprint upon her cells.
    "May it please my Lord," the ghola added, "if I say his voice gives me pleasure. This is a sign, say the Bene Tleilax, that I have heard the voice . . . before." 
    "But you don't know this for sure," Paul said.
    "I know nothing of my past for sure, my Lord. It was explained that I can have no memory of my former life. All that remains from before is the pattern set by the genes. There are, however, niches into which once familiar things may fit. There are voices, places, foods, faces, sounds, actions -- a sword in my hand, the controls of a 'thopter . . . "
    Noting how intently the Guildsmen watched this exchange, Paul asked: "Do you understand that you're a gift?" 
    "It was explained to me, my Lord." 
    Paul sat back, hands resting on the arms of the throne.
    What debt do I owe Duncan's flesh? he wondered. The man died saving my life. But this is not Idaho, this is a ghola. Yet, here were body and mind which had taught Paul to fly a 'thopter as though the wings grew from his own shoulders. Paul knew he could not pick up a sword without leaning on the harsh education Idaho had given him. A ghola. This was flesh full of false impressions, easily misread. Old associations would persist. Duncan Idaho. It wasn't so much a mask the ghola wore as it was a loose, concealing garment of personality which moved in a way different from whatever the Tleilaxu had hidden here.
    "How might you serve us?" Paul asked.
    "In any way my Lord's wishes and my capabilities agree."
    Alia, watching from her vantage point, was touched by the ghola's air of diffidence. She detected nothing feigned. Something ultimately innocent shone from the new Duncan Idaho. The original had been worldly, devil-may-care. But this flesh had been cleansed of all that. It was a pure surface upon which the Tleilaxu had written . . . what?
    She sensed the hidden perils in this gift then. This was a Tleilaxu thing. The Tleilaxu displayed a disturbing lack of inhibitions in what they created. Unbridled curiosity might guide their actions. They boasted they could make anything from the proper human raw material -- devils or saints. They sold killer-mentats. They'd produced a killer medic, overcoming the Suk inhibitions against the taking of human life to do it. Their wares included willing menials, pliant sex toys for any whim, soldiers, generals, philosophers, even an occasional moralist.
    Paul stirred, looked at Edric. "How has this gift been trained?" he asked.
    "If it please my Lord," Edric said, "it amused the Tleilaxu to train this ghola as a mentat and philosopher of the Zensunni. Thus, they sought to increase his abilities with the sword." 
    "Did they succeed?" 
    "I do not know, my Lord."
    Paul weighed the answer. Truthsense told him Edric sincerely believed the ghola to be Idaho. But there was more. The waters of Time through which this oracular Steersman moved suggested dangers without revealing them. Hayt. The Tleilaxu name spoke of peril. Paul felt himself tempted to reject the gift. Even as he felt the temptation, he knew he couldn't choose that way. This flesh made demands on House Atreides -- a fact the enemy well knew.
    "Zensunni philosopher," Paul mused, once more looking at the ghola. "You've examined your own role and motives?"
    "I approach my service in an attitude of humility, Sire. I am a cleansed mind washed free of the imperatives from my human past."
    "Would you prefer we called you Hayt or Duncan Idaho?"
    "My Lord may call me what he wishes, for I am not a name." 
    "But do you enjoy the name Duncan Idaho?" 
    "I think that was my name, Sire. It fits within me. Yet . . . it stirs up curious responses. One's name, I think, must carry much that's unpleasant along with the pleasant." 
    "What gives you the most pleasure?" Paul asked.
    Unexpectedly, the ghola laughed, said: "Looking for signs in others which reveal my former self." 
    "Do you see such signs here?"
    "Oh, yes, my Lord. Your man Stilgar there is caught between suspicion and admiration. He was friend to my former self, but this ghola flesh repels him. You, my Lord, admired the man I was . . . and you trusted him."
    "Cleansed mind," Paul said. "How can a cleansed mind put itself in bondage to us?"
    "Bondage, my Lord? The cleansed mind makes decisions in the presence of unknowns and without cause and effect. Is this bondage?"
    Paul scowled. It was a Zensunni saying, cryptic, apt -- immersed in a creed which denied objective function in all mental activity. Without cause and effect! Such thoughts shocked the mind. Unknowns? Unknowns lay in every decision, even in the oracular vision.
    "You'd prefer we called you Duncan Idaho?" Paul asked.
    "We live by differences, my Lord. Choose a name for me."
    "Let your Tleilaxu name stand," Paul said. "Hayt -- there's a name inspires caution." 
    Hayt bowed, moved back one step.
    And Alia wondered: How did he know the interview was over? I knew it because I know my brother. But there was no sign a stranger could read. Did the Duncan Idaho in him know?
    Paul turned toward the Ambassador, said: "Quarters have been set aside for your embassy. It is our desire to have a private consultation with you at the earliest opportunity. We will send for you. Let us inform you further, before you hear it from an inaccurate source, that a Reverend Mother of the Sisterhood, Gaius Helen Mohiam, has been removed from the heighliner which brought you. It was done at our command. Her presence on your ship will be an item in our talks." 
    A wave of Paul's left hand dismissed the envoy. "Hayt," Paul said, "stay here."
    The Ambassador's attendants backed away, towing the tank. Edric became orange motion in orange gas -- eyes, a mouth, gently waving limbs.
    Paul watched until the last Guildsman was gone, the great doors swinging closed behind them.
    I've done it now, Paul thought. I've accepted the ghola. The Tleilaxu creation was bait, no doubt of it. Very likely the old hag of a Reverend Mother played the same role. But it was the time of the tarot which he'd forecast in an early vision. The damnable tarot! It muddied the waters of Time until the prescient strained to detect moments but an hour off. Many a fish took the bait and escaped, he reminded himself. And the tarot worked for him as well as against him. What he could not see, others might not detect as well.
    The ghola stood, head cocked to one side, waiting.
    Stilgar moved across the steps, hid the ghola from Paul's view. In Chakobsa, the hunting language of their sietch days, Stilgar said: "That creature in the tank gives me the shudders, Sire, but this gift! Send it away!" 
    In the same tongue, Paul said: "I cannot." 
    "Idaho's dead," Stilgar argued. "This isn't Idaho. Let me take its water for the tribe."
    "The ghola is my problem, Stil. Your problem is our prisoner. I want the Reverend Mother guarded most carefully by the men I trained to resist the wiles of Voice." 
    "I like this not, Sire." 
    "I'll be cautious, Stil. See that you are, too." 
    "Very well, Sire." Stilgar stepped down to the floor of the hall, passed close to Hayt, sniffed him and strode out.
    Evil can be detected by its smell, Paul thought. Stilgar had planted the green and white Atreides banner on a dozen worlds, but remained superstitious Fremen, proof against any sophistication.
    Paul studied the gift.
    "Duncan, Duncan," he whispered. "What have they done to you?" 
    "They gave me life, m'Lord," Hayt said.
    "But why were you trained and given to us?" Paul asked.
    Hayt pursed his lips, then: "They intend me to destroy you."
    The statement's candor shook Paul. But then, how else could a Zensunni-mentat respond? Even in a ghola, a mentat could speak no less than the truth, especially out of Zensunni inner calm. This was a human computer, mind and nervous system fitted to the tasks relegated long ago to hated mechanical devices. To condition him also as a Zensunni meant a double ration of honesty . . . unless the Tleilaxu had built something even more odd into this flesh.
    Why, for example, the mechanical eyes? Tleilaxu boasted their metal eyes improved on the original. Strange, then, that more Tleilaxu didn't wear them out of choice.
    Paul glanced up at Alia's spy hole, longed for her presence and advice, for counsel not clouded by feelings of responsibility and debt.
    Once more, he looked at the ghola. This was no frivolous gift. It gave honest answers to dangerous questions.
    It makes no difference that I know this is a weapon to be used against me, Paul thought.
    "What should I do to protect myself from you?" Paul asked. It was direct speech, no royal "we," but a question as he might have put it to the old Duncan Idaho. 
    "Send me away, m'Lord."
    Paul shook his head from side to side. "How are you to destroy me?"
    Hayt looked at the guards, who'd moved closer to Paul after Stilgar's departure. He turned, cast his gaze around the hall, brought his metal eyes back to bear on Paul, nodded.
    "This is a place where a man draws away from people," Hayt said. "It speaks of such power that one can contemplate it comfortably only in the remembrance that all things are finite. Did my Lord's oracular powers plot his course into this place?"
    Paul drummed his fingers against the throne's arms. The mentat sought data, but the question disturbed him. "I came to this position by strong decisions . . . not always out of my other . . . abilities."
    "Strong decisions," Hayt said. "These temper a man's life. One can take the temper from fine metal by heating it and allowing it to cool without quenching." 
    "Do you divert me with Zensunni prattle?" Paul asked.
    "Zensunni has other avenues to explore, Sire, than diversion and display."
    Paul wet his lips with his tongue, drew in a deep breath, set his own thoughts into the counterbalance poise of the mentat. Negative answers arose around him. It wasn't expected that he'd go haring after the ghola to the exclusion of other duties. No, that wasn't it. Why a Zensunni-mentat? Philosophy . . . words . . . contemplation . . . inward searching . . . He felt the weakness of his data.
    "We need more data," he muttered.
    "The facts needed by a mentat do not brush off onto one as you might gather pollen on your robe while passing through a field of flowers," Hayt said. "One chooses his pollen carefully, examines it under powerful amplification."
    "You must teach me this Zensunni way with rhetoric," Paul said.
    The metallic eyes glittered at him for a moment, then: "M'Lord, perhaps that's what was intended." 
    To blunt my will with words and ideas? Paul wondered.
    "Ideas are most to feared when they become actions," Paul said.
    "Send me away, Sire," Hayt said, and it was Duncan Idaho's voice full of concern for "the young master." 
    Paul felt trapped by that voice. He couldn't send that voice away, even when it came from a ghola. "You will stay," he said, "and we'll both exercise caution." 
    Hayt bowed in submission.
    Paul glanced up at the spy hole, eyes pleading for Alia to take this gift off his hands and ferret out its secrets. Gholas were ghosts to frighten children. He'd never thought to know one. To know this one, he had to set himself above all compassion . . . and he wasn't certain he could do it. Duncan . . . Duncan . . . Where was Idaho in this shaped-to-measure flesh? It wasn't flesh . . . it was a shroud in fleshly shape! Idaho lay dead forever on the floor of an Arrakeen cavern. His ghost stared out of metal eyes. Two beings stood side by side in this revenant flesh. One was a threat with its force and nature hidden behind unique veils.
    Closing his eyes, Paul allowed old visions to sift through his awareness. He sensed the spirits of love and hate spouting there in a rolling sea from which no rock lifted above the chaos. No place at all from which to survey turmoil.
    Why has no vision shown me this new Duncan Idaho? he asked himself. What concealed Time from an oracle? Other oracles, obviously.
    Paul opened his eyes, asked: "Hayt, do you have the power of prescience?" 
    "No, m'Lord."
    Sincerity spoke in that voice. It was possible the ghola didn't know he possessed this ability, of course. But that'd hamper his working as a mentat. What was the hidden design?
    Old visions surged around Paul. Would he have to choose the terrible way? Distorted Time hinted at this ghola in that hideous future. Would that way close in upon him no matter what he did? 
    Disengage . . . disengage . . . disengage . . . 
    The thought tolled in his mind.
    In her position above Paul, Alia sat with chin cupped in left hand, stared down at the ghola. A magnetic attraction about this Hayt reached up to her. Tleilaxu restoration had given him youth, an innocent intensity which called out to her. She'd understood Paul's unspoken plea. When oracles failed, one turned to real spies and physical powers. She wondered, though, at her own eagerness to accept this challenge. She felt a positive desire to be near this new man, perhaps to touch him.
    He's a danger to both of us, she thought.

= = = = = =

Truth suffers from too much analysis.
-Ancient Fremen Saying

    "Reverend Mother, I shudder to see you in such circumstances," Irulan said.
    She stood just inside the cell door, measuring the various capacities of the room in her Bene Gesserit way. It was a three-meter cube carved with cutterays from the veined brown rock beneath Paul's Keep. For furnishings, it contained one flimsy basket chair occupied now by the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, a pallet with a brown cover upon which had been spread a deck of the new Dune Tarot cards, a metered water tap above a reclamation basin, a Fremen privy with moisture seals. It was all sparse, primitive. Yellow light came from anchored and caged glowglobes at the four corners of the ceiling.
    "You've sent word to the Lady Jessica?" the Reverend Mother asked.
    "Yes, but I don't expect her to lift one finger against her firstborn," Irulan said. She glanced at the cards. They spoke of the powerful turning their backs on supplicants. The card of the Great Worm lay beneath Desolate Sand. Patience was counseled. Did one require the tarot to see this? she asked herself.
    A guard stood outside watching them through a metaglass window in the door. Irulan knew there'd be other monitors on this encounter. She had put in much thought and planning before daring to come here. To have stayed away carried its own perils, though.
    The Reverend Mother had been engaged in prajna meditation interspersed with examinations of the tarot. Despite a feeling that she would never leave Arrakis alive, she had achieved a measure of calm through this. One's oracular powers might be small, but muddy water was muddy water. And there was always the Litany Against Fear.
    She had yet to assimilate the import of the actions which had precipitated her into this cell. Dark suspicions brooded in her mind (and the tarot hinted at confirmations). Was it possible the Guild had planned this?
    A yellow-robed Qizara, head shaved for a turban, beady eyes of total blue in a bland round face, skin leathered by the wind and sun of Arrakis, had awaited her on the heighliner's reception bridge. He had looked up from a bulb of spice-coffee being served by an obsequious steward, studied her a moment, put down the coffee bulb.
    "You are the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam?"
    To replay those words in her mind was to bring that moment alive in the memory. Her throat had constricted with an unmanageable spasm of fear. How had one of the Emperor's minions learned of her presence on the heighliner?
    "It came to our attention that you were aboard," the Qizara said. "Have you forgotten that you are denied permission to set foot on the holy planet?" 
    "I am not on Arrakis," she said. "I'm a passenger on a Guild heighliner in free space." 
    "There is no such thing as free space, Madame." 
    She read hate mingled with profound suspicion in his tone.
    "Muad'dib rules everywhere," he said. 
    "Arrakis is not my destination," she insisted.
    "Arrakis is the destination of everyone," he said. And she feared for a moment that he would launch into a recital of the mystical itinerary which pilgrims followed. (This very ship had carried thousands of them.) 
    But the Qizara had pulled a golden amulet from beneath his robe, kissed it, touched it to his forehead and placed it to his right ear, listened. Presently, he restored the amulet to its hidden place.
    "You are ordered to gather your luggage and accompany me to Arrakis." 
    "But I have business elsewhere!"
    In that moment, she suspected Guild perfidy . . . or exposure through some transcendent power of the Emperor or his sister. Perhaps the Steersman did not conceal the conspiracy, after all. The abomination, Alia, certainly possessed the abilities of a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. What happened when those powers were coupled with the forces which worked in her brother?
    "At once!" the Qizara snapped.
    Everything in her cried out against setting foot once more on that accursed desert planet. Here was where the Lady Jessica had turned against the Sisterhood. Here was where they'd lost Paul Atreides, the kwisatz haderach they'd sought through long generations of careful breeding.
    "At once," she agreed.
    "There's little time," the Qizara said. "When the Emperor commands, all his subjects obey."
    So the order had come from Paul!
    She thought of protesting to the heighliner's Navigator-Commander, but the futility of such a gesture stopped her. What could the Guild do?
    "The Emperor has said I must die if I set foot on Dune," she said, making a last desperate effort. "You spoke of this yourself. You are condemning me if you take me down there."
    "Say no more," the Qizara ordered. "The thing is ordained."
    That was how they always spoke of Imperial commands, she knew. Ordained! The holy ruler whose eyes could pierce the future had spoken. What must be must be. He had seen it, had He not?
    With the sick feeling that she was caught in a web of her own spinning, she had turned to obey.
    And the web had become a cell which Irulan could visit. She saw that Irulan had aged somewhat since their meeting on Wallach IX. New lines of worry spread from the corners of her eyes. Well . . . time to see if this Sister of the Bene Gesserit could obey her vows.
    "I've had worse quarters," the Reverend Mother said. "Do you come from the Emperor?" And she allowed her fingers to move as though in agitation.
    Irulan read the moving fingers and her own fingers flashed an answer as she spoke, saying: "No -- I came as soon as I heard you were here."
    "Won't the Emperor be angry?" the Reverend Mother asked. Again, her fingers moved: imperative, pressing, demanding.
    "Let him be angry. You were my teacher in the Sisterhood, just as you were the teacher of his own mother. Does he think I will turn my back on you as she has done?" And Irulan's finger-talk made excuses, begged.
    The Reverend Mother sighed. On the surface, it was the sigh of a prisoner bemoaning her fate, but inwardly she felt the response as a comment on Irulan. It was futile to hope the Atreides Emperor's precious gene pattern could be preserved through this instrument. No matter her beauty, this Princess was flawed. Under that veneer of sexual attraction lived a whining shrew more interested in words than in actions. Irulan was still a Bene Gesserit, though, and the Sisterhood reserved certain techniques to use on some of its weaker vessels as insurance that vital instructions would be carried out.
    Beneath small talk about a softer pallet, better food, the Reverend Mother brought up her arsenal of persuasion and gave her orders: the brother-sister crossbreeding must be explored. (Irulan almost broke at receiving this command.) 
    "I must have my chance!" Irulan's fingers pleaded.
    "You've had your chance," the Reverend Mother countered. And she was explicit in her instructions: Was the Emperor ever angry with his concubine? His unique powers must make him lonely. To whom could he speak in any hope of being understood? To the sister, obviously. She shared this loneliness. The depth of their communion must be exploited. Opportunities must be created to throw them together in privacy. Intimate encounters must be arranged. The possibility of eliminating the concubine must be explored. Grief dissolved traditional barriers.
    Irulan protested. If Chani were killed, suspicion would fasten immediately upon the Princess-Consort. Besides, there were other problems. Chani had fastened upon an ancient Fremen diet supposed to promote fertility and the diet eliminated all opportunity for administering the contraceptive drugs. Lifting the suppressives would make Chani even more fertile.
    The Reverend Mother was outraged and concealed it with difficulty while her fingers flashed their demands. Why had this information not been conveyed at the beginning of their conversation? How could Irulan be that stupid? If Chani conceived and bore a son, the Emperor would declare the child his heir!
    Irulan protested that she understood the dangers, but the genes might not be totally lost.
    Damn such stupidity! the Reverend Mother raged. Who knew what suppressions and genetic entanglements Chani might introduce from her wild Fremen strain? The Sisterhood must have only the pure line! And an heir would renew Paul's ambitions, spur him to new efforts in consolidating his Empire. The conspiracy could not afford such a setback.
    Defensively, Irulan wanted to know how she could have prevented Chani from trying this diet?
    But the Reverend Mother was in no mood for excuses. Irulan received explicit instructions now to meet this new threat. If Chani conceived, an abortifact must be introduced into her food or drink. Either that, or she must be killed. An heir to the throne from that source must be prevented at all costs.
    An abortifact would be as dangerous as an open attack on the concubine. Irulan objected. She trembled at the thought of trying to kill Chani.
    Was Irulan deterred by danger? The Reverend Mother wanted to know, her finger-talk conveying deep scorn.
    Angered, Irulan signaled that she knew her value as an agent in the royal household. Did the conspiracy wish to waste such a valuable agent? Was she to be thrown away? In what other way could they keep this close a watch on the Emperor? Or had they introduced another agent into the household? Was that it? Was she to be used now, desperately, and for the last time?
    In a war, all values acquired new relationships, the Reverend Mother countered. Their greatest peril was that House Atreides should secure itself with an Imperial line. The Sisterhood could not take such a risk. This went far beyond the danger to the Atreides genetic pattern. Let Paul anchor his family to the throne and the Sisterhood could look forward to centuries of disruption for its programs.
    Irulan understood the argument, but she couldn't escape the thought that a decision had been made to spend the Princess-Consort for something of great value. Was there something she should know about the ghola? Irulan ventured.
    The Reverend Mother wanted to know if Irulan thought the Sisterhood composed of fools. When had they ever failed to tell Irulan all she should know?
    It was no answer, but an admission of concealment, Irulan saw. It said she would be told no more than she needed to know.
    How could they be certain the ghola was capable of destroying the Emperor? Irulan asked.
    She could just as well have asked if melange were capable of destruction, the Reverend Mother countered.
    It was a rebuke with a subtle message, Irulan realized. The Bene Gesserit "whip that instructs" informed her that she should have understood long ago this similarity between the spice and the ghola. Melange was valuable, but it exacted a price -- addiction. It added years to a life -- decades for some -- but it was still just another way to die.
    The ghola was something of deadly value.
    The obvious way to prevent an unwanted birth was to kill the prospective mother before conception, the Reverend Mother signaled, returning to the attack.
    Of course, Irulan thought. If you decide to spend a certain sum, get as much for it as you can.
    The Reverend Mother's eyes, dark with the blue brilliance of her melange addiction, stared up at Irulan, measuring, waiting, observing minutiae.
    She reads me clearly, Irulan thought with dismay. She trained me and observed me in that training. She knows I realize what decision has been taken here. She only observes now to see how I will take this knowledge. Well, I will take it as a Bene Gesserit and a princess.
    Irulan managed a smile, pulled herself erect, thought of the evocative opening passage of the Litany Against Fear:
    "I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear . . . "
    When calmness had returned, she thought: Let them spend me. I will show them what a princess is worth. Perhaps I'll buy them more than they expected.
    After a few more empty vocalizations to bind off the interview. Irulan departed.
    When she had gone, the Reverend Mother returned to her tarot cards, laying them out in the fire-eddy pattern. Immediately, she got the Kwisatz Haderach of the Major Arcana and the card lay coupled with the Eight of Ships: the sibyl hoodwinked and betrayed. These were not cards of good omen: they spoke of concealed resources for her enemies.
    She turned away from the cards, sat in agitation, wondering if Irulan might yet destroy them.

= = = = = =

The Fremen see her as the Earth Figure, a demigoddess whose special charge is to protect the tribes through her powers of violence. She is Reverend Mother to their Reverend Mothers. To pilgrims who seek her out with demands that she restore virility or make the barren fruitful, she is a form of antimentat. She feeds on that proof that the "analytic" has limits. She represents ultimate tension. She is the virgin-harlot -- witty, vulgar, cruel, as destructive in her whims as a coriolis storm.
-St. Alia of the Knife as taken from The Irulan Report

    Alia stood like a black-robed sentinel figure on the south platform of her temple, the Fane of the Oracle which Paul's Fremen cohorts had built for her against a wall of his stronghold.
    She hated this part of her life, but knew no way to evade the temple without bringing down destruction upon them all. The pilgrims (damn them!) grew more numerous every day. The temple's lower porch was crowded with them. Vendors moved among the pilgrims, and there were minor sorcerers, haruspices, diviners, all working their trade in pitiful imitation of Paul Muad'dib and his sister.
    Red and green packages containing the new Dune Tarot were prominent among the vendors' wares, Alia saw. She wondered about the tarot. Who was feeding this device into the Arrakeen market? Why had the tarot sprung to prominence at this particular time and place? Was it to muddy Time? Spice addiction always conveyed some sensitivity to prediction. Fremen were notoriously fey. Was it an accident that so many of them dabbled in portents and omens here and now? She decided to seek an answer at the first opportunity.
    There was a wind from the southeast, a small leftover wind blunted by the scarp of the Shield Wall which loomed high in these northern reaches. The rim glowed orange through a thin dust haze underlighted by the late afternoon sun. It was a hot wind against her cheeks and it made her homesick for the sand, for the security of open spaces.
    The last of the day's mob began descending the broad greenstone steps of the lower porch, singly and in groups, a few pausing to stare at the keepsakes and holy amulets on the street vendors' racks, some consulting one last minor sorcerer. Pilgrims, supplicants, townfolk, Fremen, vendors closing up for the day -- they formed a straggling line that trailed off into the palm-lined avenue which led to the heart of the city.
    Alia's eyes picked out the Fremen, marking the frozen looks of superstitious awe on their faces, the half-wild way they kept their distance from the others. They were her strength and her peril. They still captured giant worms for transport, for sport and for sacrifice. They resented the offworld pilgrims, barely tolerated the townfolk of graben and pan, hated the cynicism they saw in the street vendors. One did not jostle a wild Fremen, even in a mob such as the ones which swarmed to Alia's Fane. There were no knifings in the Sacred Precincts, but bodies had been found . . . later.
    The departing swarm had stirred up dust. The flinty odor came to Alia's nostrils, ignited another pang of longing for the open bled. Her sense of the past, she realized, had been sharpened by the coming of the ghola. There'd been much pleasure in those untrammeled days before her brother had mounted the throne -- time for joking, time for small things, time to enjoy a cool morning or a sunset, time . . . time . . . time . . . Even danger had been good in those days -- clean danger from known sources. No need then to strain the limits of prescience, to peer through murky veils for frustrating glimpses of the future.
    Wild Fremen said it well: "Four things cannot be hidden -- love, smoke, a pillar of fire and a man striding across the open bled."
    With an abrupt feeling of revulsion, Alia retreated from the platform into the shadows of the Fane, strode along the balcony which looked down into the glistening opalescence of her Hall of Oracles. Sand on the tiles rasped beneath her feet. Supplicants always tracked sand into the Sacred Chambers! She ignored attendants, guards, postulants, the Qizarate's omnipresent priest-sycophants, plunged into the spiral passage which twisted upward to her private quarters. There, amidst divans, deep rugs, tent hangings and mementos of the desert, she dismissed the Fremen amazons Stilgar had assigned as her personal guardians. Watchdogs, more likely! When they had gone, muttering and objecting, but more fearful of her than they were of Stilgar, she stripped off her robe, leaving only the sheathed crysknife on its thong around her neck, strewed garments behind as she made for the bath.
    He was near, she knew -- that shadow-figure of a man she could sense in her future, but could not see. It angered her that no power of prescience could put flesh on that figure. He could be sensed only at unexpected moments while she scanned the lives of others. Or she came upon a smoky outline in solitary darkness when innocence lay coupled with desire. He stood just beyond an unfixed horizon, and she felt that if she strained her talents to an unexpected intensity she might see him. He was there -- a constant assault on her awareness: fierce, dangerous, immoral.
    Moist warm air surrounded her in the tub. Here was a habit she had learned from the memory-entities of the uncounted Reverend Mothers who were strung out in her awareness like pearls on a glowing necklace. Water, warm water in a sunken tub, accepted her skin as she slid into it. Green tiles with figures of red fish worked into a sea pattern surrounded the water. Such an abundance of water occupied this space that a Fremen of old would have been outraged to see it used merely for washing human flesh. 
    He was near.
    It was lust in tension with chastity, she thought. Her flesh desired a mate. Sex held no casual mystery for a Reverend Mother who had presided at the sietch orgies. The tau awareness of her other-selves could supply any detail her curiosity required. This feeling of nearness could be nothing other than flesh reaching for flesh. 
    Need for action fought lethargy in the warm water.
    Abruptly, Alia climbed dripping from the bath, strode wet and naked into the training chamber which adjoined her bedroom. The chamber, oblong and skylighted, contained the gross and subtle instruments which toned a Bene Gesserit adept into ultimate physical and mental awareness / preparedness. There were mnemonic amplifiers, digit mills from lx to strengthen and sensitize fingers and toes, odor synthesizers, tactility sensitizers, temperature gradient fields, pattern betrayers to prevent her falling into detectable habits, alpha-wave-response trainers, blink-synchronizers to tone abilities in light / dark / spectrum analysis . . .
    In ten-centimeter letters along one wall, written by her own hand in mnemonic paint, stood the key reminder from the Bene Gesserit Creed:
    "Before us, all methods of learning were tainted by instinct. We learned how to learn. Before us, instinct-ridden researchers possessed a limited attention span -- often no longer than a single lifetime. Projects stretching across fifty or more lifetimes never occurred to them. The concept of total muscle / nerve training had not entered awareness."
    As she moved into the training room, Alia caught her own reflection multiplied thousands of times in the crystal prisms of a fencing mirror swinging in the heart of a target dummy. She saw the long sword waiting on its brackets against the target, and she thought: Yes! I'll work myself to exhaustion -- drain the flesh and clear the mind.
    The sword felt right in her hand. She slipped the crysknife from its sheath at her neck, held it sinister, tapped the activating stud with the sword tip. Resistance came alive as the aura of the target shield built up, pushing her weapon slowly and firmly away. 
    Prisms glittered. The target slipped to her left.
    Alia followed with the tip of the long blade, thinking as she often did that the thing could almost be alive. But it was only servomotors and complex reflector circuits designed to lure the eyes away from danger, to confuse and teach. It was an instrument geared to react as she reacted, an anti-self which moved as she moved, balancing light on its prisms, shifting its target, offering its counter-blade.
    Many blades appeared to lunge at her from the prisms, but only one was real. She countered the real one, slipped the sword past shield resistance to tap the target. A marker light came alive: red and glistening among the prisms . . . more distraction.
    Again the thing attacked, moving at one-marker speed now, just a bit faster than it had at the beginning.
    She parried and, against all caution, moved into the danger zone, scored with the crysknife. 
    Two lights glowed from the prisms.
    Again, the thing increased speed, moving out on its rollers, drawn like a magnet to the motions of her body and the tip of her sword. 
    Attack -- parry -- counter. 
    Attack -- parry -- counter . . . 
    She had four lights alive in there now, and the thing was becoming more dangerous, moving faster with each light, offering more areas of confusion. 
    Five lights.
    Sweat glistened on her naked skin. She existed now in a universe whose dimensions were outlined by the threatening blade, the target, bare feet against the practice floor, senses / nerves / muscles -- motion against motion. 
    Attack -- parry -- counter. 
    Six lights . . . seven . . . 
    Eight!
    She had never before risked eight.
    In a recess of her mind there grew a sense of urgency, a crying out against such wildness as this. The instrument of prisms and target could not think, feel caution or remorse. And it carried a real blade. To go against less defeated the purpose of such training. That attacking blade could maim and it could kill. But the finest swordsmen in the Imperium never went against more than seven lights.
    Nine!
    Alia experienced a sense of supreme exaltation. Attacking blade and target became blurs among blurs. She felt that the sword in her hand had come alive. She was an anti-target. She did not move the blade; it moved her.
    Ten!
    Eleven!
    Something flashed past her shoulder, slowed at the shield aura around the target, slid through and tripped the deactivating stud. The lights darkened. Prisms and target twisted their way to stillness.
    Alia whirled, angered by the intrusion, but her reaction was thrown into tension by awareness of the supreme ability which had hurled that knife. It had been a throw timed to exquisite nicety -- just fast enough to get through the shield zone and not too fast to be deflected.
    And it had touched a one-millimeter spot within an eleven-light target.
    Alia found her own emotions and tensions running down in a manner not unlike that of the target dummy. She was not at all surprised to see who had thrown the knife.
    Paul stood just inside the training room doorway, Stilgar three steps behind him. Her brother's eyes were squinted in anger.
    Alia, growing conscious of her nudity, thought to cover herself, found the idea amusing. What the eyes had seen could not be erased. Slowly, she replaced the crysknife in its sheath at her neck. 
    "I might've known," she said.
    "I presume you know how dangerous that was," Paul said. He took his time reading the reactions on her face and body: the flush of her exertions coloring her skin, the wet fullness of her lips. There was a disquieting femaleness about her that he had never considered in his sister. He found it odd that he could look at a person who was this close to him and no longer recognize her in the identity framework which had seemed so fixed and familiar.
    "That was madness," Stilgar rasped, coming up to stand beside Paul.
    The words were angry, but Alia heard awe in his voice, saw it in his eyes.
    "Eleven lights," Paul said, shaking his head.
    "I'd have made it twelve if you hadn't interfered," she said. She began, to pale under his close regard, added: "And why do the damned things have that many lights if we're not supposed to try for them?"
    "A Bene Gesserit should ask the reasoning behind an open-ended system?" Paul asked.
    "I suppose you never tried for more than seven!" she said, anger returning. His attentive posture began to annoy her.
    "Just once," Paul said. "Gurney Halleck caught me on ten. My punishment was sufficiently embarrassing that I won't tell you what he did. And speaking of embarrassment . . . "
    "Next time, perhaps you'll have yourselves announced," she said. She brushed past Paul into the bedroom, found a loose gray robe, slipped into it, began brushing her hair before a wall mirror. She felt sweaty, sad, a post-coitus kind of sadness that left her with a desire to bathe once more . . . and to sleep. "Why're you here?" she asked.
    "My Lord," Stilgar said. There was an odd inflection in his voice that brought Alia around to stare at him.
    "We're here at Irulan's suggestion," Paul said, "as strange as that may seem. She believes, and information in Stil's possession appears to confirm it, that our enemies are about to make a major try for -- " 
    "My Lord!" Stilgar said, his voice sharper.
    As her brother turned, questioning, Alia continued to look at the old Fremen Naib. Something about him now made her intensely aware that he was one of the primitives. Stilgar believed in a supernatural world very near him. It spoke to him in a simple pagan tongue dispelling all doubts. The natural universe in which he stood was fierce, unstoppable, and it lacked the common morality of the Imperium.
    "Yes, Stil," Paul said. "Do you want to tell her why we came?"
    "This isn't the time to talk of why we came," Stilgar said.
    "What's wrong, Stil?"
    Stilgar continued to stare at Alia. "Sire, are you blind?" 
    Paul turned back to his sister, a feeling of unease beginning to fill him. Of all his aides, only Stilgar dared speak to him in that tone, but even Stilgar measured the occasion by its need.
    "This one must have a mate!" Stilgar blurted. "There'll be trouble if she's not wed, and that soon." 
    Alia whirled away, her face suddenly hot. How did he touch me? she wondered. Bene Gesserit self-control had been powerless to prevent her reaction. How had Stilgar done that? He hadn't the power of the Voice. She felt dismayed and angry.
    "Listen to the great Stilgar!" Alia said, keeping her back to them, aware of a shrewish quality in her voice and unable to hide it. "Advice to maidens from Stilgar, the Fremen!"
    "As I love you both, I must speak," Stilgar said, a profound dignity in his tone. "I did not become a chieftain among the Fremen by being blind to what moves men and women together. One needs no mysterious powers for this."
    Paul weighed Stilgar's meaning, reviewed what they had seen here and his own undeniable male reaction to his own sister. Yes -- there'd been a ruttish air about Alia, something wildly wanton. What had made her enter the practice floor in the nude? And risking her life in that foolhardy way! Eleven lights in the fencing prisms! That brainless automaton loomed in his mind with all the aspects of an ancient horror creature. Its possession was the shibboleth of this age, but it carried also the taint of old immorality. Once, they'd been guided by an artificial intelligence, computer brains. The Butlerian Jihad had ended that, but it hadn't ended the aura of aristocratic vice which enclosed such things.
    Stilgar was right, of course. They must find a mate for Alia.
    "I will see to it," Paul said. "Alia and I will discuss this later -- privately."
    Alia turned around, focused on Paul. Knowing how his mind worked, she realized she'd been the subject of a mentat decision, uncounted bits falling together in that human-computer analysis. There was an inexorable quality to this realization -- a movement like the movement of planets. It carried something of the order of the universe in it, inevitable and terrifying. 
    "Sire," Stilgar said, "perhaps we'd -- "
    "Not now!" Paul snapped. "We've other problems at the moment."
    Aware that she dared not try to match logic with her brother, Alia put the past few moments aside, Bene Gesserit fashion, said: "Irulan sent you?" She found herself experiencing menace in that thought.
    "Indirectly," Paul said. "The information she gives us confirms our suspicion that the Guild is about to try for a sandworm."
    "They'll try to capture a small one and attempt to start the spice cycle on some other world," Stilgar said. "It means they've found a world they consider suitable." 
    "It means they have Fremen accomplices!" Alia argued. "No offworlder could capture a worm!" 
    "That goes without saying," Stilgar said.
    "No, it doesn't," Alia said. She was outraged by such obtuseness. "Paul, certainly you . . ."
    "The rot is setting in," Paul said. "We've known that for quite some time. "I've never seen this other world, though, and that bothers me. If they -- "
    "That bothers you?" Alia demanded. "It means only that they've clouded its location with Steersmen the way they hide their sanctuaries."
    Stilgar opened his mouth, closed it without speaking. He had the overwhelming sensation that his idols had admitted blasphemous weakness.
    Paul, sensing Stilgar's disquiet, said: "We've an immediate problem! I want your opinion, Alia. Stilgar suggests we expand our patrols in the open bled and reinforce the sietch watch. It's just possible we could spot a landing party and prevent the -- " 
    "With a Steersman guiding them?" Alia asked.
    "They are desperate, aren't they?" Paul agreed. "That is why I'm here." 
    "What've they seen that we haven't?" Alia asked. 
    "Precisely."
    Alia nodded, remembering her thoughts about the new Dune Tarot. Quickly, she recounted her fears. 
    "Throwing a blanket over us," Paul said.
    "With adequate patrols," Stilgar ventured, "we might prevent the -- "
    "We prevent nothing . . . forever," Alia said. She didn't like the feel of the way Stilgar's mind was working now. He had narrowed his scope, eliminated obvious essentials. This was not the Stilgar she remembered.
    "We must count on their getting a worm," Paul said. "Whether they can start the melange cycle on another planet is a different question. They'll need more than a worm."
    Stilgar looked from brother to sister. Out of ecological thinking that had been ground into him by sietch life, he grasped their meaning. A captive worm couldn't live except within a bit of Arrakis -- sand plankton, Little Makers and all. The Guild's problem was large, but not impossible. His own growing uncertainty lay in a different area.
    "Then your visions do not detect the Guild at its work?" he asked.
    "Damnation!" Paul exploded.
    Alia studied Stilgar, sensing the savage sideshow of ideas taking place in his mind. He was hung on a rack of enchantment. Magic! Magic! To glimpse the future was to steal terrifying fire from a sacred flame. It held the attraction of ultimate peril, souls ventured and lost. One brought back from the formless, dangerous distances something with form and power. But Stilgar was beginning to sense other forces, perhaps greater powers beyond that unknown horizon. His Queen Witch and Sorcerer Friend betrayed dangerous weaknesses.
    "Stilgar," Alia said, fighting to hold him, "you stand in a valley between dunes. I stand on the crest. I see where you do not see. And, among other things, I see mountains which conceal the distances."
    "There are things hidden from you," Stilgar said. "This you've always said." 
    "All power is limited," Alia said.
    "And danger may come from behind the mountains," Stilgar said.
    "It's something on that order," Alia said.
    Stilgar nodded, his gaze fastened on Paul's face. "But whatever comes from behind the mountains must cross the dunes."

= = = = = =

The most dangerous game in the universe is to govern from an oracular base. We do not consider ourselves wise enough or brave enough to play that game. The measures detailed here for regulation in lesser matters are as near as we dare venture to the brink of government. For our purposes, we borrow a definition from the Bene Gesserit and we consider the various worlds as gene pools, sources of teachings and teachers, sources of the possible. Our goal is not to rule, but to tap these gene pools, to learn, and to free ourselves from all restraints imposed by dependency and government.
-"The Orgy as a Tool of Statecraft," Chapter Three of The Steersman's Guild

    "Is that where your father died?" Edric asked, sending a beam pointer from his tank to a jeweled marker on one of the relief maps adorning a wall of Paul's reception salon.
    "That's the shrine of his skull," Paul said. "My father died a prisoner on a Harkonnen frigate in the sink below us."
    "Oh, yes: I recall the story now," Edric said. "Something about killing the old Baron Harkonnen, his mortal enemy." Hoping he didn't betray too much of the terror which small enclosures such as this room imposed upon him, Edric rolled over in the orange gas, directed his gaze at Paul, who sat alone on a long divan of striped gray and black.
    "My sister killed the Baron," Paul said, voice and manner dry, "just before the battle of Arrakeen." 
    And why, he wondered, did the Guild man-fish reopen old wounds in this place and at this time?
    The Steersman appeared to be fighting a losing battle to contain his nervous energies. Gone were the languid fish motions of their earlier encounter. Edric's tiny eyes jerked here . . . there, questing and measuring. The one attendant who had accompanied him in here stood apart near the line of houseguards ranging the end wall at Paul's left. The attendant worried Paul -- hulking, thick-necked, blunt and vacant face. The man had entered the salon, nudging Edric's tank along on its supporting field, walking with a strangler's gait, arms akimbo. 
    Scytale, Edric had called him. Scytale, an aide.
    The aide's surface shouted stupidity, but the eyes betrayed him. They laughed at everything they saw.
    "Your concubine appeared to enjoy the performance of the Face Dancers," Edric said. "It pleases me that I could provide that small entertainment. I particularly enjoyed her reaction to seeing her own features simultaneously repeated by the whole troupe."
    "Isn't there a warning against Guildsmen bearing gifts?" Paul asked.
    And he thought of the performance out there in the Great Hall. The dancers had entered in the costumes and guise of the Dune Tarot, flinging themselves about in seemingly random patterns that devolved into fire eddies and ancient prognostic designs. Then had come the rulers -- a parade of kings and emperors like faces on coins, formal and stiff in outline, but curiously fluid. And the jokes: a copy of Paul's own face and body, Chani repeated across the floor of the Hall, even Stilgar, who had grunted and shuddered while others laughed. 
    "But our gifts have the kindest intent," Edric protested.
    "How kindly can you be?" Paul asked. "The ghola you gave us believes he was designed to destroy us." 
    "Destroy you, Sire?" Edric asked, all bland attention. "Can one destroy a god?"
    Stilgar, entering on the last words, stopped, glared at the guards. They were much farther from Paul than he liked. Angrily he motioned them closer.
    "It's all right, Stil," Paul said, lifting a hand. "Just a friendly discussion. Why don't you move the Ambassador's tank over by the end of my divan?"
    Stilgar, weighing the order, saw that it would put the Steersman's tank between Paul and the hulking aide, much too close to Paul, but . . . 
    "It's all right, Stil," Paul repeated, and he gave the private hand-signal which made the order an imperative.
    Moving with obvious reluctance, Stilgar pushed the tank closer to Paul. He didn't like the feel of the container or the heavily perfumed smell of melange around it. He took up a position at the corner of the tank beneath the orbiting device through which the Steersman spoke.
    "To kill a god," Paul said. "That's very interesting. But who says I'm a god?"
    "Those who worship you," Edric said, glancing pointedly at Stilgar.
    "Is this what you believe?" Paul asked.
    "What I believe is of no moment, Sire," Edric said. "It seems to most observers, however, that you conspire to make a god of yourself. And one might ask if that is something any mortal can do . . . safely?"
    Paul studied the Guildsman. Repellent creature, but perceptive. It was a question Paul had asked himself time and again. But he had seen enough alternate Timelines to know of worse possibilities than accepting godhead for himself. Much worse. These were not, however, the normal avenues for a Steersman to probe. Curious. Why had that question been asked? What could Edric hope to gain by such effrontery? Paul's thoughts went flick (the association of Tleilaxu would be behind this move) -- flick (the Jihad's recent Sembou victory would bear on Edric's action) -- flick (various Bene Gesserit credos showed themselves here) flick . . .
    A process involving thousands of information bits poured flickering through his computational awareness. It required perhaps three seconds.
    "Does a Steersman question the guidelines of prescience?" Paul asked, putting Edric on the weakest ground.
    This disturbed the Steersman, but he covered well, coming up with what sounded like a long aphorism: "No man of intelligence questions the fact of prescience, Sire. Oracular vision has been known to men since most ancient times. It has a way of entangling us when we least suspect. Luckily, there are other forces in our universe." 
    "Greater than prescience?" Paul asked, pressing him.
    "If prescience alone existed and did everything, Sire, it would annihilate itself. Nothing but prescience? Where could it be applied except to its own degenerating movements?" 
    "There's always the human situation," Paul agreed.
    "A precarious thing at best," Edric said, "without confusing it by hallucinations."
    "Are my visions no more than hallucinations?" Paul asked, mock sadness in his voice. "Or do you imply that my worshippers hallucinate?"
    Stilgar, sensing the mounting tensions, moved a step nearer Paul, fixed his attention on the Guildsman reclining in the tank.
    "You twist my words, Sire," Edric protested. An odd sense of violence lay suspended in the words.
    Violence here? Paul wondered. They wouldn't dare! Unless (and he glanced at his guards) the forces which protected him were to be used in replacing him.
    "But you accuse me of conspiring to make a god of myself," Paul said, pitching his voice that only Edric and Stilgar might hear. "Conspire?"
    "A poor choice of words, perhaps, my Lord," Edric said.
    "But significant," Paul said. "It says you expect the worst of me."
    Edric arched his neck, stared sideways at Stilgar with a look of apprehension. "People always expect the worst of the rich and powerful, Sire. It is said one can always tell an aristocrat: he reveals only those of his vices which will make him popular." 
    A tremor passed across Stilgar's face.
    Paul looked up at the movement, sensing the thoughts and angers whispering in Stilgar's mind. How dared this Guildsman talk thus to Muad'dib? 
    "You're not joking, of course," Paul said. 
    "Joking, Sire?"
    Paul grew aware of dryness in his mouth. He felt that there were too many people in this room, that the air he breathed had passed through too many lungs. The taint of melange from Edric's tank felt threatening.
    "Who might my accomplices be in such a conspiracy?" Paul asked presently. "Do you nominate the Qizarate?" 
    Edric's shrug stirred the orange gas around his head. He no longer appeared concerned by Stilgar, although the Fremen continued to glare at him.
    "Are you suggesting that my missionaries of the Holy Orders, all of them, are preaching subtle falsehood?" Paul insisted.
    "It could be a question of self-interest and sincerity," Edric said.
    Stilgar put a hand to the crysknife beneath his robe.
    Paul shook his head, said: "Then you accuse me of insincerity."
    "I'm not sure that accuse is the proper word, Sire."
    The boldness of this creature! Paul thought. And he said: "Accused or not, you're saying my bishops and I are no better than power-hungry brigands."
    "Power-hungry, Sire?" Again, Edric looked at Stilgar. "Power tends to isolate those who hold too much of it. Eventually, they lose touch with reality . . . and fall."
    "M'Lord," Stilgar growled, "you've had men executed for less!"
    "Men, yes," Paul agreed. "But this is a Guild Ambassador." 
    "He accuses you of an unholy fraud!" Stilgar said.
    "His thinking interests me, Stil," Paul said. "Contain your anger and remain alert." 
    "As Muad'dib commands."
    "Tell me, Steersman," Paul said, "how could we maintain this hypothetical fraud over such enormous distances of space and time without the means to watch every missionary, to examine every nuance in every Qizarate priory and temple?" 
    "What is time to you?" Edric asked.
    Stilgar frowned in obvious puzzlement. And he thought: Muad'dib has often said he sees past the veils of time. What is the Guildsman really saying?
    "Wouldn't the structure of such a fraud begin to show holes?" Paul asked. "Significant disagreements, schisms . . . doubts, confessions of guilt -- surely fraud could not suppress all these."
    "What religion and self-interest cannot hide, governments can," Edric said.
    "Are you testing the limits of my tolerance?" Paul asked.
    "Do my arguments lack all merit?" Edric countered.
    Does he want us to kill him? Paul wondered. Is Edric offering himself as a sacrifice?
    "I prefer the cynical view," Paul said, testing. "You obviously are trained in all the lying tricks of statecraft, the double meanings and the power words. Language is nothing more than a weapon to you and, thus, you test my armor."
    "The cynical view," Edric said, a smile stretching his mouth. "And rulers are notoriously cynical where religions are concerned. Religion, too, is a weapon. What manner of weapon is religion when it becomes the government?"
    Paul felt himself go inwardly still, a profound caution gripping him. To whom was Edric speaking? Damnable clever words, heavy with manipulation leverages -- that undertone of comfortable humor, the unspoken air of shared Secrets: his manner said he and Paul were two sophisticates, men of a wider universe who understood things not granted common folk. With a feeling of shock, Paul realized that he had not been the main target for all this rhetoric. This affliction visited upon the court had been speaking for the benefit of others -- speaking to Stilgar, to the household guards . . . perhaps even to the hulking aide.
    "Religious mana was thrust upon me," Paul said. "I did not seek it." And he thought: There! Let this man-fish think himself victorious in our battle of words!
    "Then why have you not disavowed it, Sire?" Edric asked.
    "Because of my sister Alia," Paul said, watching Edric carefully. "She is a goddess. Let me urge caution where Alia is concerned lest she strike you dead with her glance." 
    A gloating smile began forming on Edric's mouth, was replaced by a look of shock.
    "I am deadly serious," Paul said, watching the shock spread, seeing Stilgar nod.
    In a bleak voice, Edric said: "You have mauled my confidence in you, Sire. And no doubt that was your intent."
    "Do not be certain you know my intent," Paul said, and he signaled Stilgar that the audience was at an end.
    To Stilgar's questioning gesture asking if Edric were to be assassinated, Paul gave a negative hand-sign, amplified it with an imperative lest Stilgar take matters into his own hands.
    Scytale, Edric's aide, moved to the rear corner of the tank, nudged it toward the door. When he came opposite Paul, he stopped, turned that laughing gaze on Paul, said: "If my Lord permits?"
    "Yes, what is it?" Paul asked, noting how Stilgar moved close in answer to the implied menace from this man.
    "Some say," Scytale said, "that people cling to Imperial leadership because space is infinite. They feel lonely without a unifying symbol. For a lonely people, the Emperor is a definite place. They can turn toward him and say: 'See, there He is. He makes us one.' Perhaps religion serves the same purpose, m'Lord." 
    Scytale nodded pleasantly, gave Edric's tank another nudge. They moved out of the salon, Edric supine in his tank, eyes closed. The Steersman appeared spent, all his nervous energies exhausted.
    Paul stared after the shambling figure of Scytale, wondering at the man's words. A peculiar fellow, that Scytale, he thought. While he was speaking, he had radiated a feeling of many people -- as though his entire genetic inheritance lay exposed on his skin.
    "That was odd," Stilgar said, speaking to no one in particular.
    Paul arose from the divan as a guard closed the door behind Edric and the escort.
    "Odd," Stilgar repeated. A vein throbbed at his temple.
    Paul dimmed the salon's lights, moved to a window which opened onto an angled cliff of his Keep. Lights glittered far below -- pigmy movement. A work gang moved down there bringing giant plasmeld blocks to repair a facade of Alia's temple which had been damaged by a freak twisting of a sandblast wind.
    "That was a foolish thing, Usul, inviting that creature into these chambers," Stilgar said.
    Usul, Paul thought. My sietch name. Stilgar reminds me that he ruled over me once, that he saved me from the desert.
    "Why did you do it?" Stilgar asked, speaking from close behind Paul.
    "Data," Paul said. "I need more data."
    "Is it not dangerous to try meeting this threat only as a mentat?" 
    That was perceptive, Paul thought.
    Mentat computation remained finite. You couldn't say something boundless within the boundaries of any language. Mentat abilities had their uses, though. He said as much now, daring Stilgar to refute his argument.
    "There's always something outside," Stilgar said. "Some things best kept outside."
    "Or inside," Paul said. And he accepted for a moment his own oracular/mentat summation. Outside, yes. And inside: here lay the true horror. How could he protect himself from himself? They certainly were setting him up to destroy himself, but this was a position hemmed in by even more terrifying possibilities.
    His reverie was broken by the sound of rapid footsteps. The figure of Korba the Qizara surged through the doorway backlighted by the brilliant illumination in the hallways. He entered as though hurled by an unseen force and came to an almost immediate halt when he encountered the salon's gloom. His hands appeared to be full of shigawire reels. They glittered in the light from the hall, strange little round jewels that were extinguished as a guardsman's hand came into view, closed the door.
    "Is that you, m'Lord?" Korba asked, peering into the shadows.
    "What is it?" Stilgar asked. 
    "Stilgar?" 
    "We're both here. What is it?" 
    "I'm disturbed by this reception for the Guildsman." 
    "Disturbed?" Paul asked.
    "The people say, m'Lord, that you honor our enemies." 
    "Is that all?" Paul said. "Are those the reels I asked you to bring earlier?" He indicated the shigawire orbs in Korba's hands.
    "Reels . . . oh! Yes, m'Lord. These are the histories. Will you view them here?" 
    "I've viewed them. I want them for Stilgar here." 
    "For me?" Stilgar asked. He felt resentment grow at what he interpreted as caprice on Paul's part. Histories! Stilgar had sought out Paul earlier to discuss the logistics computations for the Zabulon conquest. The Guild Ambassador's presence had intervened. And now -- Korba with histories!
    "How much history do you know?" Paul mused aloud, studying the shadowy figure beside him.
    "M'Lord, I can name every world our people touched in their migrations. I know the reaches of Imperial . . ." 
    "The Golden Age of Earth, have you ever studied that?"
    "Earth? Golden Age?" Stilgar was irritated and puzzled. Why would Paul wish to discuss myths from the dawn of time? Stilgar's mind still felt crammed with Zabulon data -- computations from the staff mentats: two hundred and five attack frigates with thirty legions, support battalions, pacification cadres, Qizarate missionaries . . . the food requirements (he had the figures right here in his mind) and melange . . . weaponry, uniforms, medals . . . urns for the ashes of the dead . . . the number of specialists -- men to produce raw materials of propaganda, clerks, accountants . . . spies . . . and spies upon the spies . . . 
    "I brought the pulse-synchronizer attachment, also, m'Lord," Korba ventured. He obviously sensed the tensions building between Paul and Stilgar and was disturbed by them.
    Stilgar shook his head from side to side. Pulse-synchronizer? Why would Paul wish him to use a mnemonic flutter-system on a shigawire projector? Why scan for specific data in histories? This was mentat work! As usual, Stilgar found he couldn't escape a deep suspicion at the thought of using a projector and attachments. The thing always immersed him in disturbing sensations, an overwhelming shower of data which his mind sorted out later, surprising him with information he had not known he possessed.
    "Sire, I came with the Zabulon computations," Stilgar said.
    "Dehydrate the Zabulon computations!" Paul snapped, using the obscene Fremen term which meant that here was moisture no man could demean himself by touching.
    "M'Lord!"
    "Stilgar," Paul said, "you urgently need a sense of balance which can come only from an understanding of long-term effects. What little information we have about the old times, the pittance of data which the Butlerians left us, Korba has brought it for you. Start with the Genghis Khan."
    "Ghengis . . . Khan? Was he of the Sardaukar, m'Lord?"
    "Oh, long before that. He killed . . . perhaps four million."
    "He must've had formidable weaponry to kill that many, Sire. Lasbeams, perhaps, or . . ."
    "He didn't kill them himself, Stil. He killed the way I kill, by sending out his legions. There's another emperor I want you to note in passing -- a Hitler. He killed more than six million. Pretty good for those days." 
    "Killed . . . by his legions?" Stilgar asked. 
    "Yes."
    "Not very impressive statistics, m'Lord." 
    "Very good, Stil." Paul glanced at the reels in Korba's hands. Korba stood with them as though he wished he could drop them and flee. "Statistics: at a conservative estimate, I've killed sixty-one billion, sterilized ninety planets, completely demoralized five hundred others. I've wiped out the followers of forty religions which had existed since -- "
    "Unbelievers!" Korba protested. "Unbelievers all!" 
    "No," Paul said. "Believers."
    "My Liege makes a joke," Korba said, voice trembling. "The Jihad has brought ten thousand worlds into the shining light of -- "
    "Into the darkness," Paul said. "We'll be a hundred generations recovering from Muad'dib's Jihad. I find it hard to imagine that anyone will ever surpass this." A barking laugh erupted from his throat. 
    "What amuses Muad'dib?" Stilgar asked.
    "I am not amused. I merely had a sudden vision of the Emperor Hitler saying something similar. No doubt he did."
    "No other ruler ever had your powers," Korba argued. "Who would dare challenge you? Your legions control the known universe and all the -- "
    "The legions control," Paul said. "I wonder if they know this?"
    "You control your legions, Sire," Stilgar interrupted, and it was obvious from the tone of his voice that he suddenly felt his own position in that chain of command, his own hand guiding all that power.
    Having set Stilgar's thoughts in motion along the track he wanted, Paul turned his full attention to Korba, said: "Put the reels here on the divan." As Korba obeyed, Paul said: "How goes the reception, Korba? Does my sister have everything well in hand?"
    "Yes, m'Lord." Korba's tone was wary. "And Chani watches from the spy hole. She suspects there may be Sardaukar in the Guild entourage."
    "No doubt she's correct," Paul said. "The jackals gather."
    "Bannerjee," Stilgar said, naming the chief of Paul's Security detail, "was worried earlier that some of them might try to penetrate the private areas of the Keep." 
    "Have they?" 
    "Not yet."
    "But there was some confusion in the formal gardens," Korba said.
    "What sort of confusion?" Stilgar demanded. 
    Paul nodded.
    "Strangers coming and going," Korba said, "trampling the plants, whispered conversations -- I heard reports of some disturbing remarks." 
    "Such as?" Paul asked.
    "Is this the way our taxes are spent? I'm told the Ambassador himself asked that question."
    "I don't find that surprising," Paul said. "Were there many strangers in the gardens?" 
    "Dozens, m'Lord."
    "Bannerjee stationed picked troopers at the vulnerable doors, m'Lord," Stilgar said. He turned as he spoke, allowing the salon's single remaining light to illuminate half his face. The peculiar lighting, the face, all touched a node of memory in Paul's mind -- something from the desert. Paul didn't bother bringing it to full recall, his attention being focused on how Stilgar had pulled back mentally. The Fremen had a tight-skinned forehead which mirrored almost every thought flickering across his mind. He was suspicious now, profoundly suspicious of his Emperor's odd behavior.
    "I don't like the intrusion into the gardens," Paul said. "Courtesy to guests is one thing, and the formal necessities of greeting an envoy, but this . . . " 
    "I'll see to removing them," Korba said. "Immediately." 
    "Wait!" Paul ordered as Korba started to turn.
    In the abrupt stillness of the moment, Stilgar edged himself into a position where he could study Paul's face. It was deftly done. Paul admired the way of it, an achievement devoid of any forwardness. It was a Fremen thing: slyness touched by respect for another's privacy, a movement of necessity.
    "What time is it?" Paul asked. 
    "Almost midnight, Sire," Korba said.
    "Korba, I think you may be my finest creation," Paul said.
    "Sire!" There was injury in Korba's voice.
    "Do you feel awe of me?" Paul asked.
    "You are Paul-Muad'dib who was Usul in our sietch," Korba said. "You know my devotion to -- " 
    "Have you ever felt like an apostle?" Paul asked.
    Korba obviously misunderstood the words, but correctly interpreted the tone. "My Emperor knows I have a clean conscience!" 
    "Shai-hulud save us," Paul murmured.
    The questioning silence of the moment was broken by the sound of someone whistling as he walked down the outer hall. The whistling was stilled by a guardsman's barked command as it came opposite the door.
    "Korba, I think you may survive all this," Paul said. And he read the growing light of understanding on Stilgar's face.
    "The strangers in the gardens, Sire?" Stilgar asked.
    "Ahh, yes," Paul said. "Have Bannerjee put them out, Stil. Korba will assist." 
    "Me, Sire?" Korba betrayed deep disquiet.
    "Some of my friends have forgotten they once were Fremen," Paul said, speaking to Korba, but designing his words for Stilgar. "You will mark down the ones Chani identifies as Sardaukar and you will have them killed. Do it yourself. I want it done quietly and without undue disturbance. We must keep in mind that there's more to religion and government than approving treaties and sermons."
    "I obey the orders of Muad'dib," Korba whispered. 
    "The Zabulon computations?" Stilgar asked.
    "Tomorrow," Paul said. "And when the strangers are removed from the gardens, announce that the reception is ended. The party's over, Stil." 
    "I understand, m'Lord." 
    "I'm sure you do," Paul said.

= = = = = =

Here lies a toppled god --  
His fall was not a small one. 
We did but build his pedestal, 
A narrow and a tall one.
-Tleilaxu Epigram

    Alia crouched, resting elbows on knees, chin on fists, stared at the body on the dune -- a few bones and some tattered flesh that once had been a young woman. The hands, the head, most of the upper torso were gone -- eaten by the coriolis wind. The sand all around bore the tracks of her brother's medics and questors. They were gone now, all excepting the mortuary attendants who stood to one side with Hayt, the ghola, waiting for her to finish her mysterious perusal of what had been written here.
    A wheat-colored sky enfolded the scene in the glaucous light common to midafternoon for these latitudes.
    The body had been discovered several hours earlier by a low-flying courier whose instruments had detected a faint water trace where none should be. His call had brought the experts. And they had learned -- what? That this had been a woman of about twenty years, Fremen, addicted to semuta . . . and she had died here in the crucible of the desert from the effects of a subtle poison of Tleilaxu origin.
    To die in the desert was a common enough occurrence. But a Fremen addicted to semuta, this was such a rarity that Paul had sent her to examine the scene in the ways their mother had taught them.
    Alia felt that she had accomplished nothing here except to cast her own aura of mystery about a scene that was already mysterious enough. She heard the ghola's feet stir the sand, looked at him. His attention rested momentarily upon the escort 'thopters circling overhead like a flock of ravens.
    Beware of the Guild bearing gifts, Alia thought.
    The mortuary 'thopter and her own craft stood on the sand near a rock outcropping behind the ghola. Focusing on the grounded 'thopters filled Alia with a craving to be airborne and away from here.
    But Paul had thought she might see something here which others would miss. She squirmed in her stillsuit. It felt raspingly unfamiliar after all the suitless months of city life. She studied the ghola, wondering if he might know something important about this peculiar death. A lock of his black-goat hair, she saw, had escaped his stillsuit hood. She sensed her hand longing to tuck that hair back into place.
    As though lured by this thought, his gleaming gray metal eyes turned toward her. The eyes set her trembling and she tore her gaze away from him.
    A Fremen woman had died here from a poison called "the throat of hell."
    A Fremen addicted to semuta.
    She shared Paul's disquiet at this conjunction.
    The mortuary attendants waited patiently. This corpse contained not enough water for them to salvage. They felt no need to hurry. And they'd believe that Alia, through some glyptic art, was reading a strange truth in these remains.
    No strange truth came to her.
    There was only a distant feeling of anger deep within her at the obvious thoughts in the attendants' minds. It was a product of the damned religious mystery. She and her brother could not be people. They had to be something more. The Bene Gesserit had seen to that by manipulating Atreides ancestry. Their mother had contributed to it by thrusting them onto the path of witchery.
    And Paul perpetuated the difference.
    The Reverend Mothers encapsulated in Alia's memories stirred restlessly, provoking adab flashes of thought: "Peace, Little One! You are what you are. There are compensations."
    Compensations!
    She summoned the ghola with a gesture. 
    He stopped beside her, attentive, patient. 
    "What do you see in this?" she asked.
    "We may never learn who it was died here," he said. "The head, the teeth are gone. The hands . . . Unlikely such a one had a genetic record somewhere to which her cells could be matched."
    "Tleilaxu poison," she said. "What do you make of that?" 
    "Many people buy such poisons."
    "True enough. And this flesh is too far gone to be regrown as was done with your body." 
    "Even if you could trust the Tleilaxu to do it," he said.
    She nodded, stood. "You will fly me back to the city now."
    When they were airborne and pointed north, she said: "You fly exactly as Duncan Idaho did."
    He cast a speculative glance at her. "Others have told me this."
    "What are you thinking now?" she asked. 
    "Many things." 
    "Stop dodging my question, damn you!" 
    "Which question?" 
    She glared at him.
    He saw the glare, shrugged.
    How like Duncan Idaho, that gesture, she thought. Accusingly, her voice thick and with a catch in it, she said: "I merely wanted your reactions voiced to play my own thoughts against them. That young woman's death bothers me." 
    "I was not thinking about that." 
    "What were you thinking about?"
    "About the strange emotions I feel when people speak of the one I may have been." 
    "May have been?" 
    "The Tleilaxu are very clever." 
    "Not that clever. You were Duncan Idaho." 
    "Very likely. It's the prime computation." 
    "So you get emotional?"
    "To a degree. I feel eagerness. I'm uneasy. There's a tendency to tremble and I must devote effort to controlling it. I get . . . flashes of imagery." 
    "What imagery?"
    "It's too rapid to recognize. Flashes. Spasms . . . almost memories." 
    "Aren't you curious about such memories?" 
    "Of course. Curiosity urges me forward, but I move against a heavy reluctance. I think: 'What if I'm not the one they believe me to be?' I don't like that thought." 
    "And this is all you were thinking?" 
    "You know better than that, Alia."
    How dare he use my given name? She felt anger rise and go down beneath the memory of the way he'd spoken: softly throbbing undertones, casual male confidence. A muscle twitched along her jaw. She clenched her teeth.
    "Isn't that El Kuds down there?" he asked, dipping a wing briefly, causing a sudden flurry in their escort.
    She looked down at their shadows rippling across the promontory above Harg Pass, at the cliff and the rock pyramid containing the skull of her father. El Kuds -- the Holy Place.
    "That's the Holy Place," she said.
    "I must visit that place one day," he said. "Nearness to your father's remains may bring memories I can capture." 
    She saw suddenly how strong must be this need to know who he'd been. It was a central compulsion with him. She looked back at the rocks, the cliff with its base sloping into a dry beach and a sea of sand -- cinnamon rock lifting from the dunes like a ship breasting waves. 
    "Circle back," she said. 
    "The escort . . . " 
    "They'll follow. Swing under them." 
    He obeyed.
    "Do you truly serve my brother?" she asked, when he was on the new course, the escort following. 
    "I serve the Atreides," he said, his tone formal.
    And she saw his right hand lift, fall -- almost the old salute of Caladan. A pensive look came over his face. She watched him peer down at the rock pyramid. 
    "What bothers you?" she asked.
    His lips moved. A voice emerged, brittle, tight: "He was . . . he was . . ." A tear slid down his cheek.
    Alia found herself stilled by Fremen awe. He gave water to the dead! Compulsively, she touched a finger to his cheek, felt the tear. 
    "Duncan," she whispered.
    He appeared locked to the 'thopter's controls, gaze fastened to the tomb below. 
    She raised her voice: "Duncan!"
    He swallowed, shook his head, looked at her, the metal eyes glistening. "I . . . felt . . . an arm . . . on my shoulders," he whispered. "I felt it! An arm." His throat worked. "It was . . . a friend. It was . . . my friend." 
    "Who?" 
    "I don't know. I think it was . . . I don't know." 
    The call light began flashing in front of Alia, their escort captain wanting to know why they returned to the desert. She took the microphone, explained that they had paid a brief homage to her father's tomb. The captain reminded her that it was late.
    "We will go to Arrakeen now," she said, replacing the microphone.
    Hayt took a deep breath, banked their 'thopter around to the north.
    "It was my father's arm you felt, wasn't it?" she asked.
    "Perhaps."
    His voice was that of the mentat computing probabilities, and she saw he had regained his composure. 
    "Are you aware of how I know my father?" she asked. 
    "I have some idea."
    "Let me make it clear," she said. Briefly, she explained how she had awakened to Reverend Mother awareness before birth, a terrified fetus with the knowledge of countless lives embedded in her nerve cells -- and all this after the death of her father.
    "I know my father as my mother knew him," she said. "In every last detail of every experience she shared with him. In a way, I am my mother. I have all her memories up to the moment when she drank the Water of Life and entered the trance of transmigration." 
    "Your brother explained something of this." 
    "He did? Why?" 
    "I asked." 
    "Why?" 
    "A mentat requires data."
    "Oh." She looked down at the flat expanse of the Shield Wall -- tortured rock, pits and crevices.
    He saw the direction of her gaze, said: "A very exposed place, that down there."
    "But an easy place to hide," she said. She looked at him. "It reminds me of a human mind . . . with all its concealments." 
    "Ahhh," he said.
    "Ahhh? What does that mean -- ahhh?" She was suddenly angry with him and the reason for it escaped her.
    "You'd like to know what my mind conceals," he said. It was a statement, not a question.
    "How do you know I haven't exposed you for what you are by my powers of prescience?" she demanded. 
    "Have you?" He seemed genuinely curious. 
    "No!" 
    "Sibyls have limits," he said.
    He appeared to be amused and this reduced Alia's anger. "Amused? Have you no respect for my powers?" she asked. The question sounded weakly argumentative even to her own ears.
    "I respect your omens and portents perhaps more than you think," he said. "I was in the audience for your Morning Ritual." 
    "And what does that signify?"
    "You've great ability with symbols," he said, keeping his attention on the 'thopter's controls. "That's a Bene Gesserit thing, I'd say. But, as with many witches, you've become careless of your powers." 
    She felt a spasm of fear, blared: "How dare you?" 
    "I dare much more than my makers anticipated," he said. "Because of that rare fact, I remain with your brother."
    Alia studied the steel balls which were his eyes: no human expression there. The stillsuit hood concealed the line of his jaw. His mouth remained firm, though. Great strength in it . . . and determination. His words had carried a reassuring intensity. " . . . dare much more . . . " That was a thing Duncan Idaho might have said. Had the Tleilaxu fashioned their ghola better than they knew -- or was this mere sham, part of his conditioning?
    "Explain yourself, ghola," she commanded.
    "Know thyself, is that thy commandment?" he asked.
    Again, she felt that he was amused. "Don't bandy words with me, you . . . you thing!" she said. She put a hand to the crysknife in its throat sheath. "Why were you given to my brother?"
    "Your brother tells me that you watched the presentation," he said. "You've heard me answer that question for him." 
    "Answer it again . . . for me!" 
    "I am intended to destroy him." 
    "Is that the mentat speaking?"
    "You know the answer to that without asking," he chided. "And you know, as well, that such a gift wasn't necessary. Your brother already was destroying himself quite adequately."
    She weighed these words, her hand remaining on the haft of her knife. A tricky answer, but there was sincerity in the voice.
    "Then why such a gift?" she probed.
    "It may have amused the Tleilaxu. And, it is true, that the Guild asked for me as a gift." 
    "Why?" 
    "Same answer." 
    "How am I careless of my powers?" 
    "How are you employing them?" he countered.
    His question slashed through to her own misgivings. She took her hand away from the knife, asked: "Why do you say my brother was destroying himself?" 
    "Oh, come now, child! Where are these vaunted powers? Have you no ability to reason?" 
    Controlling anger, she said: "Reason for me, mentat." 
    "Very well." He glanced around at their escort, returned his attention to their course. The plain of Arrakeen was beginning to show beyond the northern rim of the Shield Wall. The pattern of the pan and graben villages remained indistinct beneath a dust pall, but the distant gleam of Arrakeen could be discerned.
    "Symptoms," he said. "Your brother keeps an official Panegyrist who -- "
    "Who was a gift of the Fremen Naibs!" 
    "An odd gift from friends," he said. "Why would they surround him with flattery and servility? Have you really listened to this Panegyrist? 'The people are illuminated by Muad'dib. The Umma Regent, our Emperor, came out of darkness to shine resplendently upon all men. He is our Sire. He is precious water from an endless fountain. He spills joy for all the universe to drink,' Pah!" 
    Speaking softly, Alia said: "If I but repeated your words for our Fremen escort, they'd hack you into bird feed." 
    "Then tell them."
    "My brother rules by the natural law of heaven!" 
    "You don't believe that, so why say it?" 
    "How do you know what I believe?" She experienced trembling that no Bene Gesserit powers could control. This ghola was having an effect she hadn't anticipated.
    "You commanded me to reason as a mentat," he reminded her.
    "No mentat knows what I believe!" She took two deep, shuddering breaths. "How dare you judge us?" 
    "Judge you? I don't judge." 
    "You've no idea how we were taught!"
    "Both of you were taught to govern," he said. "You were conditioned to an overweening thirst for power. You were imbued with a shrewd grasp of politics and a deep understanding for the uses of war and ritual. Natural law? What natural law? That myth haunts human history. Haunts! It's a ghost. It's insubstantial, unreal. Is your Jihad a natural law?" 
    "Mentat jabber," she sneered.
    "I'm a servant of the Atreides and I speak with candor," he said.
    "Servant? We've no servants; only disciples." 
    "And I am a disciple of awareness," he said. "Understand that, child, and you -- "
    "Don't call me child!" she snapped. She slipped her crysknife half out of its sheath.
    "I stand corrected." He glanced at her, smiled, returned his attention to piloting the 'thopter. The cliffsided structure of the Atreides Keep could be made out now, dominating the northern suburbs of Arrakeen. "You are something ancient in flesh that is little more than a child," he said. "And the flesh is disturbed by its new womanhood."
    "I don't know why I listen to you," she growled, but she let the crysknife fall back into its sheath, wiped her palm on her robe. The palm, wet with perspiration, disturbed her sense of Fremen frugality. Such a waste of the body's moisture!
    "You listen because you know I'm devoted to your brother," he said. "My actions are clear and easily understood."
    "Nothing about you is clear and easily understood. You're the most complex creature I've ever seen. How do I know what the Tleilaxu built into you?"
    "By mistake or intent," he said, "they gave me freedom to mold myself."
    "You retreat into Zensunni parables," she accused. "The wise man molds himself -- the fool lives only to die." Her voice was heavy with mimicry. "Disciple of awareness!"
    "Men cannot separate means and enlightenment," he said.
    "You speak riddles!" 
    "I speak to the opening mind." 
    "I'm going to repeat all this to Paul." 
    "He's heard most of it already."
    She found herself overwhelmed by curiosity. "How is it you're still alive . . . and free? What did he say?" 
    "He laughed. And he said, 'People don't want a bookkeeper for an Emperor; they want a master, someone who'll protect them from change.' But he agreed that destruction of his Empire arises from himself." 
    "Why would he say such things?"
    "Because I convinced him I understand his problem and will help him."
    "What could you possibly have said to do that?" 
    He remained silent, banking the 'thopter into the downwind leg for a landing at the guard complex on the roof of the Keep.
    "I demand you tell me what you said!" 
    "I'm not sure you could take it."
    "I'll be the judge of that! I command you to speak at once!"
    "Permit me to land us first," he said. And not waiting for her permission, he turned onto the base leg, brought the wings into optimum lift, settled gently onto the bright orange pad atop the roof. 
    "Now," Alia said. "Speak."
    "I told him that to endure oneself may be the hardest task in the universe." 
    She shook her head. "That's . . . that's . . . " 
    "A bitter pill," he said, watching the guards run toward them across the roof, taking up their escort positions. 
    "Bitter nonsense!"
    "The greatest palatinate earl and the lowliest stipendiary serf share the same problem. You cannot hire a mentat or any other intellect to solve it for you. There's no writ of inquest or calling of witnesses to provide answers. No servant -- or disciple -- can dress the wound. You dress it yourself or continue bleeding for all to see." 
    She whirled away from him, realizing in the instant of action what this betrayed about her own feelings. Without wile of voice or witch-wrought trickery, he had reached into her psyche once more. How did he do this? 
    "What have you told him to do?" she whispered. 
    "I told him to judge, to impose order."
    Alia stared out at the guard, marking how patiently they waited -- how orderly. "To dispense justice," she murmured.
    "Not that!" he snapped. "I suggested that he judge, no more, guided by one principle, perhaps . . ." 
    "And that?" 
    "To keep his friends and destroy his enemies."
    "To judge unjustly, then."
    "What is justice? Two forces collide. Each may have the right in his own sphere. And here's where an Emperor commands orderly solutions. Those collisions he cannot prevent -- he solves." 
    "How?" 
    "In the simplest way: he decides." 
    "Keeping his friends and destroying his enemies." 
    "Isn't that stability? People want order, this kind or some other. They sit in the prison of their hungers and see that war has become the sport of the rich. That's a dangerous form of sophistication. It's disorderly." 
    "I will suggest to my brother that you are much too dangerous and must be destroyed," she said, turning to face him.
    "A solution I've already suggested," he said.
    "And that's why you are dangerous," she said, measuring out her words. "You've mastered your passions."
    "That is not why I'm dangerous." Before she could move, he leaned across, gripped her chin in one hand, planted his lips on hers.
    It was a gentle kiss, brief. He pulled away and she stared at him with a shock leavened by glimpses of spasmodic grins on the faces of her guardsmen still standing at orderly attention outside.
    Alia put a finger to her lips. There'd been such a sense of familiarity about that kiss. His lips had been flesh of a future she'd seen in some prescient byway. Breast heaving, she said: "I should have you flayed." 
    "Because I'm dangerous?" 
    "Because you presume too much!"
    "I presume nothing. I take nothing which is not first offered to me. Be glad I did not take all that was offered." He opened his door, slid out. "Come along. We've dallied too long on a fool's errand." He strode toward the entrance dome beyond the pad.
    Alia leaped out, ran to match his stride. "I'll tell him everything you've said and everything you did," she said. 
    "Good." He held the door for her.
    "He will order you executed," she said, slipping into the dome.
    "Why? Because I took the kiss I wanted?" He followed her, his movement forcing her back. The door slid closed behind him.
    "The kiss you wanted!" Outrage filled her.
    "All right, Alia. The kiss you wanted, then." He started to move around her toward the drop field.
    As though his movement had propelled her into heightened awareness, she realized his candor -- the utter truthfulness of him. The kiss I wanted, she told herself. True.
    "Your truthfulness, that's what's dangerous," she said, following him.
    "You return to the ways of wisdom," he said, not breaking his stride. "A mentat could not've stated the matter more directly. Now: what is it you saw in the desert?"
    She grabbed his arm, forcing him to a halt. He'd done it again: shocked her mind into sharpened awareness.
    "I can't explain it," she said, "but I keep thinking of the Face Dancers. Why is that?"
    "That is why your brother sent you to the desert," he said, nodding. "Tell him of this persistent thought." 
    "But why?" She shook her head. "Why Face Dancers?" 
    "There's a young woman dead out there," he said. "Perhaps no young woman is reported missing among the Fremen."

= = = = = =

I think what a joy it is to be alive, and I wonder if I'll ever leap inward to the root of this flesh and know myself as once I was. The root is there. Whether any act of mine can find it, that remains tangled in the future. But all things a man can do are mine. Any act of mine may do it.
-The Ghola Speaks Alia's Commentary

    As he lay immersed in the screaming odor of the spice, staring inward through the oracular trance, Paul saw the moon become an elongated sphere. It rolled and twisted, hissing -- the terrible hissing of a star being quenched in an infinite sea -- down . . . down . . . down . . . like a ball thrown by a child. 
    It was gone.
    This moon had not set. Realization engulfed him. It was gone: no moon. The earth quaked like an animal shaking its skin. Terror swept over him.
    Paul jerked upright on his pallet, eyes wide open, staring. Part of him looked outward, part inward. Outwardly, he saw the plasmeld grillwork which vented his private room, and he knew he lay beside a stone-like abyss of his Keep. Inwardly, he continued to see the moon fall.
    Out! Out!
    His grillwork of plasmeld looked onto the blazing light of noon across Arrakeen. Inward -- there lay blackest night. A shower of sweet odors from a garden roof nibbled at his senses, but no floral perfume could roll back that fallen moon.
    Paul swung his feet to the cold surface of the floor, peered through the grillwork. He could see directly across to the gentle arc of a footbridge constructed of crystal-stabilized gold and platinum. Fire jewels from far Cedon decorated the bridge. It led to the galleries of the inner city across a pool and fountain filled with waterflowers. If he stood, Paul knew, he could look down into petals as clean and red as fresh blood whirling, turning there -- disks of ambient color tossed on an emerald freshet.
    His eyes absorbed the scene without pulling him from spice thralldom.
    That terrible vision of a lost moon.
    The vision suggested a monstrous loss of individual security. Perhaps he'd seen his civilization fall, toppled by its own pretensions.
    A moon . . . a moon . . . a falling moon.
    It had taken a massive dose of the spice essence to penetrate the mud thrown up by the tarot. All it had shown him was a falling moon and the hateful way he'd known from the beginning. To buy an end for the Jihad, to silence the volcano of butchery, he must discredit himself.
    Disengage . . . disengage . . . disengage . . . 
    Floral perfume from the garden roof reminded him of Chani. He longed for her arms now, for the clinging arms of love and forgetfulness. But even Chani could not exorcise this vision. What would Chani say if he went to her with the statement that he had a particular death in mind? Knowing it to be inevitable, why not choose an aristocrat's death, ending life on a secret flourish, squandering any years that might have been? To die before coming to the end of willpower, was that not an aristocrat's choice?
    He stood, crossed to the lapped opening in the grillwork, went out onto a balcony which looked upward to flowers and vines trailing from the garden. His mouth held the dryness of a desert march. 
    Moon . . . moon -- where is that moon?
    He thought of Alia's description, the young woman's body found in the dunes. A Fremen addicted to semuta! Everything fitted the hateful pattern.
    You do not take from this universe, he thought. It grants what it will.
    The remains of a conch shell from the seas of Mother Earth lay on a low table beside the balcony rail. He took its lustrous smoothness into his hands, tried to feel backward in Time. The pearl surface reflected glittering moons of light. He tore his gaze from it, peered upward past the garden to a sky become a conflagration -- trails of rainbow dust shining in the silver sun.
    My Fremen call themselves "Children of the Moon," he thought.
    He put down the conch, strode along the balcony. Did that terrifying moon hold out hope of escape? He probed for meaning in the region of mystic communion. He felt weak, shaken, still gripped by the spice.
    At the north end of his plasmeld chasm, he came in sight of the lower buildings of the government warren. Foot traffic thronged the roof walks. He felt that the people moved there like a frieze against a background of doors, walls, tile designs. The people were tiles! When he blinked, he could hold them frozen in his mind. A frieze.
    A moon falls and is gone.
    A feeling came over him that the city out there had been translated into an odd symbol for his universe. The buildings he could see had been erected on the plain where his Fremen had obliterated the Sardaukar legions. Ground once trampled by battles rang now to the rushing clamor of business.
    Keeping to the balcony's outer edge, Paul strode around the corner. Now, his vista was a suburb where city structures lost themselves in rocks and the blowing sand of the desert. Alia's temple dominated the foreground; green and black hangings along its two-thousand-meter sides displayed the moon symbol of Muad'dib. 
    A falling moon.
    Paul passed a hand across his forehead and eyes. The symbol-metropolis oppressed him. He despised his own thoughts. Such vacillation in another would have aroused his anger.
    He loathed his city!
    Rage rooted in boredom flickered and simmered deep within him, nurtured by decisions that couldn't be avoided. He knew which path his feet must follow. He'd seen it enough times, hadn't he? Seen it! Once . . . long ago, he'd thought of himself as an inventor of government. But the invention had fallen into old patterns. It was like some hideous contrivance with plastic memory. Shape it any way you wanted, but relax for a moment, and it snapped into the ancient forms. Forces at work beyond his reach in human breasts eluded and defied him.
    Paul stared out across the rooftops. What treasures of untrammeled life lay beneath those roofs? He glimpsed leaf-green places, open plantings amidst the chalk-red and gold of the roofs. Green, the gift of Muad'dib and his water. Orchards and groves lay within his view -- open plantings to rival those of fabled Lebanon. 
    "Muad'dib spends water like a madman," Fremen said. 
    Paul put his hands over his eyes. 
    The moon fell.
    He dropped his hands, stared at his metropolis with clarified vision. Buildings took on an aura of monstrous imperial barbarity. They stood enormous and bright beneath the northern sun. Colossi! Every extravagance of architecture a demented history could produce lay within his view: terraces of mesa proportion, squares as large as some cities, parks, premises, bits of cultured wilderness.
    Superb artistry abutted inexplicable prodigies of dismal tastelessness. Details impressed themselves upon him: a postern out of most ancient Baghdad . . . a dome dreamed in mythical Damascus . . . an arch from the low gravity of Atar . . . harmonious elevations and queer depths. All created an effect of unrivaled magnificence. 
    A moon! A moon! A moon!
    Frustration tangled him. He felt the pressure of mass-unconscious, that burgeoning sweep of humankind across his universe. They rushed upon him with a force like a gigantic tidal bore. He sensed the vast migrations at work in human affairs: eddies, currents, gene flows. No dams of abstinence, no seizures of impotence nor maledictions could stop it.
    Muad'dib's Jihad was less than an eye-blink in this larger movement. The Bene Gesserit swimming in this tide, that corporate entity trading in genes, was trapped in the torrent as he was. Visions of a falling moon must be measured against other legends, other visions in a universe where even the seemingly eternal stars waned, flickered, died . . . 
    What mattered a single moon in such a universe?
    Far within his fortress citadel, so deep within that the sound sometimes lost itself in the flow of city noises, a ten-string rebaba tinkled with a song of the Jihad, a lament for a woman left behind on Arrakis:

Her hips are dunes curved by the wind, 
Her eyes shine like summer heat. 
Two braids of hair hang down her back -- 
Rich with water rings, her hair!
My hands remember her skin, 
Fragrant as amber, flower-scented. 
Eyelids tremble with memories . . . 
I am stricken by love's white flame!

    The song sickened him. A tune for stupid creatures lost in sentimentality! As well sing to the dune-impregnated corpse Alia had seen.
    A figure moved in shadows of the balcony's grillwork. Paul whirled.
    The ghola emerged into the sun's full glare. His metal eyes glittered.
    "Is it Duncan Idaho or the man called Hayt?" Paul asked.
    The ghola came to a stop two paces from him. "Which would my Lord prefer?" 
    The voice carried a soft ring of caution.
    "Play the Zensunni," Paul said bitterly. Meanings within meanings! What could a Zensunni philosopher say or do to change one jot of the reality unrolling before them at this instant? 
    "My Lord is troubled."
    Paul turned away, stared at the Shield Wall's distant scarp, saw wind-carved arches and buttresses, terrible mimicry of his city. Nature playing a joke on him! See what I can build! He recognized a slash in the distant massif, a place where sand spilled from a crevasse, and thought: There! Right there, we fought Sardaukar! 
    "What troubles my lord?" the ghola asked. 
    "A vision," Paul whispered.
    "Ahhhhh, when the Tleilaxu first awakened me, I had visions. I was restless, lonely . . . not really knowing I was lonely. Not then. My visions revealed nothing! The Tleilaxu told me it was an intrusion of the flesh which men and gholas all suffer, a sickness, no more." 
    Paul turned, studied the ghola's eyes, those pitted, steely balls without expression. What visions did those eyes see?
    "Duncan . . . Duncan . . ." Paul whispered. 
    "I am called Hayt."
    "I saw a moon fall," Paul said. "It was gone, destroyed. I heard a great hissing. The earth shook." 
    "You are drunk on too much time," the ghola said.
    "I ask for the Zensunni and get the mentat!" Paul said. "Very well! Play my vision through your logic, mentat. Analyze it and reduce it to mere words laid out for burial."
    "Burial, indeed," the ghola said. "You run from death. You strain at the next instant, refuse to live here and now. Augury! What a crutch for an Emperor!"
    Paul found himself fascinated by a well-remembered mole on the ghola's chin.
    "Trying to live in this future," the ghola said, "do you give substance to such a future? Do you make it real?" 
    "If I go the way of my vision-future, I'll be alive then," Paul muttered. "What makes you think I want to live there?"
    The ghola shrugged. "You asked me for a substantial answer."
    "Where is there substance in a universe composed of events?" Paul asked. "Is there a final answer? Doesn't each solution produce new questions?"
    "You've digested so much time you have delusions of immortality," the ghola said. "Even your Empire, my lord, must live its time and die."
    "Don't parade smoke-blackened altars before me," Paul growled. "I've heard enough sad histories of gods and messiahs. Why should I need special powers to forecast ruins of my own like all those others? The lowliest servant of my kitchens could do this." He shook his head. "The moon fell!"
    "You've not brought your mind to rest at its beginning," the ghola said.
    "Is that how you destroy me?" Paul demanded. "Prevent me from collecting my thoughts?" 
    "Can you collect chaos?" the ghola asked. "We Zensunni say: 'Not collecting, that is the ultimate gathering.' What can you gather without gathering yourself?"
    "I'm deviled by a vision and you spew nonsense!" Paul raged. "What do you know of prescience?"
    "I've seen the oracle at work," the ghola said. "I've seen those who seek signs and omens for their individual destiny. They fear what they seek."
    "My falling moon is real," Paul whispered. He took a trembling breath. "It moves. It moves."
    "Men always fear things which move by themselves," the ghola said. "You fear your own powers. Things fall into your head from nowhere. When they fall out, where do they go?"
    "You comfort me with thorns," Paul growled.
    An inner illumination came over the ghola's face. For a moment, he became pure Duncan Idaho. "I give you what comfort I can," he said.
    Paul wondered at that momentary spasm. Had the ghola felt grief which his mind rejected? Had Hayt put down a vision of his own?
    "My moon has a name," Paul whispered.
    He let the vision flow over him then. Though his whole being shrieked, no sound escaped him. He was afraid to speak, fearful that his voice might betray him. The air of this terrifying future was thick with Chani's absence. Flesh that had cried in ecstasy, eyes that had burned him with their desire, the voice that had charmed him because it played no tricks of subtle control -- all gone, back into the water and the sand.
    Slowly, Paul turned away, looked out at the present and the plaza before Alia's temple. Three shaven-headed pilgrims entered from the processional avenue. They wore grimy yellow robes and hurried with their heads bent against the afternoon's wind. One walked with a limp, dragging his left foot. They beat their way against the wind, rounded a corner and were gone from his sight.
    Just as his moon would go, they were gone. Still, his vision lay before him. Its terrible purpose gave him no choice.
    The flesh surrenders itself, he thought. Eternity takes back its own. Our bodies stirred these waters briefly, danced with a certain intoxication before the love of life and self, dealt with a few strange ideas, then submitted to the instruments of Time. What can we say of this? I occurred. I am not . . . yet, I occurred.

= = = = = =

"You do not beg the sun for mercy."
-Maud'dib's Travail from The Stilgar Commentary

    One moment of incompetence can be fatal, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam reminded herself.
    She hobbled along, apparently unconcerned, within a ring of Fremen guards. One of those behind her, she knew, was a deaf-mute immune to any wiles of Voice. No doubt he'd been charged to kill her at the slightest provocation.
    Why had Paul summoned her? she wondered. Was he about to pass sentence? She remembered the day long ago when she'd tested him . . . the child kwisatz haderach. He was a deep one.
    Damn his mother for all eternity! It was her fault the Bene Gesserit had lost their hold on this gene line.
    Silence surged along the vaulted passages ahead of her entourage. She sensed the word being passed. Paul would hear the silence. He'd know of her coming before it was announced. She didn't delude herself with ideas that her powers exceeded his. 
    Damn him!
    She begrudged the burdens age had imposed on her: the aching joints, responses not as quick as once they'd been, muscles not as elastic as the whipcords of her youth. A long day lay behind her and a long life. She'd spent this day with the Dune Tarot in a fruitless search for some clue to her own fate. But the cards were sluggish.
    The guards herded her around a corner into another of the seemingly endless vaulted passages. Triangular meta-glass windows on her left gave a view upward to trellised vines and indigo flowers in deep shadows cast by the afternoon sun. Tiles lay underfoot -- figures of water creatures from exotic planets. Water reminders everywhere. Wealth . . . riches.
    Robed figures passed across another hall in front of her, cast covert glances at the Reverend Mother. Recognition was obvious in their manner -- and tension.
    She kept her attention on the sharp hairline of the guard immediately in front: young flesh, pink creases at the uniform collar. 
    The immensity of this ighir citadel began to impress her. Passages . . . passages . . . They passed an open doorway from which emerged the sound of timbur and flute playing soft, elder music. A glance showed her blue-in-blue Fremen eyes staring from the room. She sensed in them the ferment of legendary revolts stirring in wild genes.
    There lay the measure of her personal burden, she knew. A Bene Gesserit could not escape awareness of the genes and their possibilities. She was touched by a feeling of loss: that stubborn fool of an Atreides! How could he deny the jewels of posterity within his loins? A kwisatz haderach! Born out of this time, true, but real -- as real as his abomination of a sister . . . and there lay a dangerous unknown. A wild Reverend Mother spawned without Bene Gesserit inhibitions, holding no loyalty to orderly development of the genes. She shared her brother's powers, no doubt -- and more.
    The size of the citadel began to oppress her. Would the passages never end? The place reeked of terrifying physical power. No planet, no civilization in all human history had ever before seen such man-made immensity. A dozen ancient cities could be hidden in its walls!
    They passed oval doors with winking lights. She recognized them for Ixian handiwork: pneumatic transport orifices. Why was she being marched all this distance, then? The answer began to shape itself in her mind: to oppress her in preparation for this audience with the Emperor.
    A small clue, but it joined other subtle indications -- the relative suppression and selection of words by her escort, the traces of primitive shyness in their eyes when they called her Reverend Mother, the cold and bland, essentially odorless nature of these halls -- all combined to reveal much that a Bene Gesserit could interpret. 
    Paul wanted something from her!
    She concealed a feeling of elation. A bargaining lever existed. It remained only to find the nature of that lever and test its strength. Some levers had moved things greater than this citadel. A finger's touch had been known to topple civilizations.
    The Reverend Mother reminded herself then of Scytale's assessment: When a creature has developed into one thing, he will choose death rather than change into his opposite.
    The passages through which she was being escorted grew larger by subtle stages -- tricks of arching, graduated amplification of pillared supports, displacement of the triangular windows by larger, oblong shapes. Ahead of her, finally, loomed double doors centered in the far wall of a tall antechamber. She sensed that the doors were very large, and was forced to suppress a gasp as her trained awareness measured out the true proportions. The doorway stood at least eighty meters high, half that in width.
    As she approached with her escort, the doors swung inward -- an immense and silent movement of hidden machinery. She recognized more Ixian handiwork. Through that towering doorway she marched with her guards into the Grand Reception Hall of the Emperor Paul Atreides -- "Muad'dib, before whom all people are dwarfed." Now, she saw the effect of that popular saying at work.
    As she advanced toward Paul on the distant throne, the Reverend Mother found herself more impressed by the architectural subtleties of her surroundings than she was by the immensities. The space was large: it could've housed the entire citadel of any ruler in human history. The open sweep of the room said much about hidden structural forces balanced with nicety. Trusses and supporting beams behind these walls and the faraway domed ceiling must surpass anything ever before attempted. Everything spoke of engineering genius.
    Without seeming to do so, the hall grew smaller at its far end, refusing to dwarf Paul on his throne centered on a dais. An untrained awareness, shocked by surrounding proportions, would see him at first as many times larger than his actual size. Colors played upon the unprotected psyche: Paul's green throne had been cut from a single Hagar emerald. It suggested growing things and, out of the Fremen mythos, reflected the mourning color. It whispered that here sat he who could make you mourn -- life and death in one symbol, a clever stress of opposites. Behind the throne, draperies cascaded in burnt orange, curried gold of Dune earth, and cinnamon flecks of melange. To a trained eye, the symbolism was obvious, but it contained hammer blows to beat down the uninitiated.
    Time played its role here.
    The Reverend Mother measured the minutes required to approach the Imperial Presence at her hobbling pace. You had time to be cowed. Any tendency toward resentment would be squeezed out of you by the unbridled power which focused down upon your person. You might start the long march toward that throne as a human of dignity, but you ended the march as a gnat.
    Aides and attendants stood around the Emperor in a curiously ordered sequence -- attentive household guardsmen along the draped back wall, that abomination, Alia, two steps below Paul and on his left hand; Stilgar, the Imperial lackey, on the step directly below Alia; and on the right, one step up from the floor of the hall, a solitary figure: the fleshly revenant of Duncan Idaho, the ghola. She marked older Fremen among the guardsmen, bearded Naibs with stillsuit scars on their noses, sheathed crysknives at their waists, a few maula pistols, even some lasguns. Those most be trusted men, she thought, to carry lasguns in Paul's presence when he obviously wore a shield generator. She could see the shimmering of its field around him. One burst of a lasgun into that field and the entire citadel would be a hole in the ground.
    Her guard stopped ten paces from the foot of the dais, parted to open an unobstructed view of the Emperor. She noted now the absence of Chani and Irulan, wondered at it. He held no important audience without them, so it was said.
    Paul nodded to her, silent, measuring.
    Immediately, she decided to take the offensive, said: "So, the great Paul Atreides deigns to see the one he banished."
    Paul smiled wryly, thinking: She knows I want something from her. That knowledge had been inevitable, she being who she was. He recognized her powers. The Bene Gesserit didn't become Reverend Mothers by chance.
    "Shall we dispense with fencing?" he asked.
    Would it be this easy? she wondered. And she said: "Name the thing you want."
    Stilgar stirred, cast a sharp glance at Paul. The Imperial lackey didn't like her tone.
    "Stilgar wants me to send you away," Paul said.
    "Not kill me?" she asked. "I would've expected something more direct from a Fremen Naib."
    Stilgar scowled, said: "Often, I must speak otherwise than I think. That is called diplomacy."
    "Then let us dispense with diplomacy as well," she said. "Was it necessary to have me walk all that distance. I am an old woman."
    "You had to be shown how callous I can be," Paul said. "That way, you'll appreciate magnanimity."
    "You dare such gaucheries with a Bene Gesserit?" she asked.
    "Gross actions carry their own messages," Paul said.
    She hesitated, weighed his words. So -- he might yet dispense with her . . . grossly, obviously, if she . . . if she what?
    "Say what it is you want from me," she muttered.
    Alia glanced at her brother, nodded toward the draperies behind the throne. She knew Paul's reasoning in this, but disliked it all the same. Call it wild prophecy: She felt pregnant with reluctance to take part in this bargaining.
    "You must be careful how you speak to me, old woman," Paul said.
    He called me old woman when he was a stripling, the Reverend Mother thought. Does he remind me now of my hand in his past? The decision I made then, must I remake it here? She felt the weight of decision, a physical thing that set her knees to trembling. Muscles cried their fatigue.
    "It was a long walk," Paul said, "and I can see that you're tired. We will retire to my private chamber behind the throne. You may sit there." He gave a hand-signal to Stilgar, arose.
    Stilgar and the ghola converged on her, helped her up the steps, followed Paul through a passage concealed by the draperies. She realized then why he had greeted her in the hall: a dumb-show for the guards and Naibs. He feared them, then. And now -- now, he displayed kindly benevolence, daring such wiles on a Bene Gesserit. Or was it daring? She sensed another presence behind, glanced back to see Alia following. The younger woman's eyes held a brooding, baleful cast. The Reverend Mother shuddered.
    The private chamber at the end of the passage was a twenty-meter cube of plasmeld, yellow glowglobes for light, the deep orange hangings of a desert stilltent around the walls. It contained divans, soft cushions, a faint odor of melange, crystal water flagons on a low table. It felt cramped, tiny after the outer hall.
    Paul seated her on a divan, stood over her, studying the ancient face -- steely teeth, eyes that hid more than they revealed, deeply wrinkled skin. He indicated a water flagon. She shook her head, dislodging a wisp of gray hair.
    In a low voice, Paul said: "I wish to bargain with you for the life of my beloved." 
    Stilgar cleared his throat.
    Alia fingered the handle of the crysknife sheathed at her neck.
    The ghola remained at the door, face impassive, metal eyes pointed at the air above the Reverend Mother's head.
    "Have you had a vision of my hand in her death?" the Reverend Mother asked. She kept her attention on the ghola, oddly disturbed by him. Why should she feel threatened by the ghola? He was a tool of the conspiracy.
    "I know what it is you want from me," Paul said, avoiding her question.
    Then he only suspects, she thought. The Reverend Mother looked down at the tips of her shoes exposed by a fold of her robe. Black . . . black . . . shoes and robe showed marks of her confinement: stains, wrinkles. She lifted her chin, met an angry glare in Paul's eyes. Elation surged through her, but she hid the emotion behind pursed lips, slitted eyelids.
    "What coin do you offer?" she asked.
    "You may have my seed, but not my person," Paul said. "Irulan banished and inseminated by artificial --" 
    "You dare!" the Reverend Mother flared, stiffening. 
    Stilgar took a half step forward.
    Disconcertingly, the ghola smiled. And now Alia was studying him.
    "We'll not discuss the things your Sisterhood forbids," Paul said. "I will listen to no talk of sins, abominations or the beliefs left over from past Jihads. You may have my seed for your plans, but no child of Irulan's will sit on my throne." 
    "Your throne," she sneered. 
    "My throne." 
    "Then who will bear the Imperial heir?" 
    "Chani." 
    "She is barren." 
    "She is with child."
    An involuntary indrawn breath exposed her shock. "You lie!" she snapped.
    Paul held up a restraining hand as Stilgar surged forward.
    "We've known for two days that she carries my child." 
    "But Irulan . . . " 
    "By artificial means only. That's my offer." 
    The Reverend Mother closed her eyes to hide his face. Damnation! To cast the genetic dice in such a way! Loathing boiled in her breast. The teaching of the Bene Gesserit, the lessons of the Butlerian Jihad -- all proscribed such an act. One did not demean the highest aspirations of humankind. No machine could function in the way of a human mind. No word or deed could imply that men might be bred on the level of animals. 
    "Your decision," Paul said.
    She shook her head. The genes, the precious Atreides genes -- only these were important. Need went deeper than proscription. For the Sisterhood, mating mingled more than sperm and ovum. One aimed to capture the psyche.
    The Reverend Mother understood now the subtle depths of Paul's offer. He would make the Bene Gesserit party to an act which would bring down popular wrath . . . were it ever discovered. They could not admit such paternity if the Emperor denied it. This coin might save the Atreides genes for the Sisterhood, but it would never buy a throne.
    She swept her gaze around the room, studying each face: Stilgar, passive and waiting now; the ghola frozen at some inward place; Alia watching the ghola . . . and Paul -- wrath beneath a shallow veneer. 
    "This is your only offer?" she asked. 
    "My only offer."
    She glanced at the ghola, caught by a brief movement of muscles across his cheeks. Emotion? "You, ghola," she said. "Should such an offer be made? Having been made, should it be accepted? Function as the mentat for us." 
    The metallic eyes turned to Paul. 
    "Answer as you will," Paul said.
    The ghola returned his gleaming attention to the Reverend Mother, shocked her once more by smiling. "An offer is only as good as the real thing it buys," he said. "The exchange offered here is life-for-life, a high order of business."
    Alia brushed a strand of coppery hair from her forehead, said: "And what else is hidden in this bargain?" 
    The Reverend Mother refused to look at Alia, but the words burned in her mind. Yes, far deeper implications lay here. The sister was an abomination, true, but there could be no denying her status as a Reverend Mother with all the title implied. Gaius Helen Mohiam felt herself in this instant to be not one single person, but all the others who sat like tiny congeries in her memory. They were alert, every Reverend Mother she had absorbed in becoming a Priestess of the Sisterhood. Alia would be standing in the same situation here.
    "What else?" the ghola asked. "One wonders why the witches of the Bene Gesserit have not used Tleilaxu methods."
    Gaius Helen Mohiam and all the Reverend Mothers within her shuddered. Yes, the Tleilaxu did loathsome things. If one let down the barriers to artificial insemination, was the next step a Tleilaxu one -- controlled mutation?
    Paul, observing the play of emotion around him, felt abruptly that he no longer knew these people. He could see only strangers. Even Alia was a stranger.
    Alia said: "If we set the Atreides genes adrift in a Bene Gesserit river, who knows what may result?" 
    Gaius Helen Mohiam's head snapped around, and she met Alia's gaze. For a flashing instant, they were two Reverend Mothers together, communing on a single thought: What lay behind any Tleilaxu action? The ghola was a Tleilaxu thing. Had he put this plan into Paul's mind? Would Paul attempt to bargain directly with the Bene Tleilaxu?
    She broke her gaze from Alia's, feeling her own ambivalence and inadequacies. The pitfall of Bene Gesserit training, she reminded herself, lay in the powers granted: such powers predisposed one to vanity and pride. But power deluded those who used it. One tended to believe power could overcome any barrier . . . including one's own ignorance.
    Only one thing stood paramount here for the Bene Gesserit, she told herself. That was the pyramid of generations which had reached an apex in Paul Atreides . . . and in his abomination of a sister. A wrong choice here and the pyramid would have to be rebuilt . . . starting generations back in the parallel lines and with breeding specimens lacking the choicest characteristics.
    Controlled mutation, she thought. Did the Tleilaxu really practice it? How tempting! She shook her head, the better to rid it of such thoughts. 
    "You reject my proposal?" Paul asked. 
    "I'm thinking," she said.
    And again, she looked at the sister. The optimum cross for this female Atreides had been lost . . . killed by Paul. Another possibility remained, however -- one which would cement the desired characteristic into an offspring. Paul dared offer animal breeding to the Bene Gesserit! How much was he really prepared to pay for his Chani's life? Would he accept a cross with his own sister?
    Sparring for time, the Reverend Mother said: "Tell me, oh flawless exemplar of all that's holy, has Irulan anything to say of your proposal?" 
    "Irulan will do what you tell her to do," Paul growled.
    True enough, Mohiam thought. She firmed her jaw, offered a new gambit: "There are two Atreides." 
    Paul, sensing something of what lay in the old witch's mind, felt blood darken his face. "Careful what you suggest," he said.
    "You'd just use Irulan to gain your own ends, eh?" she asked.
    "Wasn't she trained to be used?" Paul asked. 
    And we trained her, that's what he's saying, Mohiam thought. Well . . . Irulan's a divided coin. Was there another way to spend such a coin?
    "Will you put Chani's child on the throne?" the Reverend Mother asked.
    "On my throne." Paul said. He glanced at wondering suddenly if she knew the divergent possibilities in this exchange. Alia stood with eyes closed, an odd stillness-of-person about her. With what inner force did she commune? Seeing his sister thus, Paul felt he'd been cast adrift. Alia stood on a shore that was receding from him.
    The Reverend Mother made her decision, said: "This is too much for one person to decide. I must consult with my Council on Wallach. Will you permit a message?"
    As though she needed my permission! Paul thought.
    He said: "Agreed, then. But don't delay too long. I will not sit idly by while you debate."
    "Will you bargain with the Bene Tleilaxu?" the ghola asked, his voice a sharp intrusion.
    Alia's eyes popped open and she stared at the ghola as though she'd been wakened by a dangerous intruder.
    "I've made no such decision," Paul said. "What I will do is go into the desert as soon as it can be arranged. Our child will be born in sietch." 
    "A wise decision," Stilgar intoned.
    Alia refused to look at Stilgar. It was a wrong decision. She could feel this in every cell. Paul must know it. Why had he fixed himself upon such a path?
    "Have the Bene Tleilaxu offered their services?" Alia asked. She saw Mohiam hanging on the answer.
    Paul shook his head. "No." He glanced at Stilgar. "Stil, arrange for the message to be sent to Wallach." 
    "At once, m'Lord."
    Paul turned away, waited while Stilgar summoned guards, left with the old witch. He sensed Alia debating whether to confront him with more questions. She turned, instead, to the ghola.
    "Mentat," she said, "will the Tleilaxu bid for favor with my brother?" 
    The ghola shrugged.
    Paul felt his attention wander. The Tleilaxu? No . . . not in the way Alia meant. Her question revealed, though, that she had not seen the alternatives here. Well . . . vision varied from sibyl to sibyl. Why not a variance from brother to sister? Wandering . . . wandering . . . He came back from each thought with a start to pick up shards of the nearby conversation.
    " . . . must know what the Tleilaxu . . ." 
    " . . . the fullness of data is always . . ." 
    " . . . healthy doubts where . . . "
    Paul turned, looked at his sister, caught her attention. He knew she would see tears on his face and wonder at them. Let her wonder. Wondering was a kindness now. He glanced at the ghola, seeing only Duncan Idaho despite the metallic eyes. Sorrow and compassion warred in Paul. What might those metal eyes record?
    There are many degrees of sight and many degrees of blindness, Paul thought. His mind turned to a paraphrase of the passage from the Orange Catholic Bible: 'What senses do we lack that we cannot see another world all around us?'
    Were those metal eyes another sense than sight?
    Alia crossed to her brother, sensing his utter sadness. She touched a tear on his cheek with a Fremen gesture of awe, said: "We must not grieve for those dear to us before their passing."
    "Before their passing," Paul whispered. "Tell me, little sister, what is before?"

= = = = = =

"I've had a bellyful of the god and priest business! You think I don't see my own mythos? Consult your data once more, Hayt. I've insinuated my rites into the most elementary human acts. The people eat in the name of Muad'dib! They make love in my name, are born in my name -- cross the street in my name. A roof beam cannot be raised in the lowliest hovel of far Gangishree without invoking the blessing of Muad'dib!"
-Book of Diatribes from The Hayt Chronicle

    "You risk much leaving your post and coming to me here at this time," Edric said, glaring through the walls of his tank at the Face Dancer.
    "How weak and narrow is your thinking," Scytale said. "Who is it who comes to visit you?" 
    Edric hesitated, observing the hulk shape, heavy eyelids, blunt face. It was early in the day and Edric's metabolism had not yet cycled from night repose into full melange consumption.
    "This is not the shape which walked the streets?" Edric asked.
    "One would not look twice at some of the figures I have been today," Scytale said.
    The chameleon thinks a change of shape will hide him from anything, Edric thought with rare insight. And he wondered if his presence in the conspiracy truly hid them from all oracular powers. The Emperor's sister, now . . .
    Edric shook his head, stirring the orange gas of his tank, said: "Why are you here?"
    "The gift must be prodded to swifter action," Scytale said.
    "That cannot be done." 
    "A way must be found," Scytale insisted. 
    "Why?"
    "Things are not to my liking. The Emperor is trying to split us. Already he has made his bid to the Bene Gesserit." 
    "Oh, that." 
    "That! You must prod the ghola to . . . "
    "You fashioned him, Tleilaxu," Edric said. "You know better than to ask this." He paused, moved closer to the transparent wall of his tank. "Or did you lie to us about this gift?" 
    "Lie?"
    "You said the weapon was to be aimed and released, nothing more. Once the ghola was given we could not tamper."
    "Any ghola can be disturbed," Scytale said. "You need do nothing more than question him about his original being." 
    "What will this do?"
    "It will stir him to actions which will serve our purposes."
    "He is a mentat with powers of logic and reason," Edric objected. "He may guess what I'm doing . . . or the sister. If her attention is focused upon --"
    "Do you hide us from the sibyl or don't you?" Scytale asked.
    "I'm not afraid of oracles," Edric said. "I'm concerned with logic, with real spies, with the physical powers of the Imperium, with the control of the spice, with --"
    "One can contemplate the Emperor and his powers comfortably if one remembers that all things are Finite," Scytale said.
    Oddly, the Steersman recoiled in agitation, threshing his limbs like some weird newt. Scytale fought a sense of loathing at the sight. The Guild Navigator wore his usual dark leotard bulging at the belt with various containers. Yet . . . he gave the impression of nakedness when he moved. It was the swimming, reaching movements, Scytale decided, and he was struck once more by the delicate linkages of their conspiracy. They were not a compatible group. That was weakness.
    Edric's agitation subsided. He stared out at Scytale, vision colored by the orange gas which sustained him. What plot did the Face Dancer hold in reserve to save himself? Edric wondered. The Tleilaxu was not acting in a predictable fashion. Evil omen.
    Something in the Navigator's voice and actions told Scytale that the Guildsman feared the sister more than the Emperor. This was an abrupt thought flashed on the screen of awareness. Disturbing. Had they overlooked something important about Alia? Would the ghola be sufficient weapon to destroy both?
    "You know what is said of Alia?" Scytale asked, probing.
    "What do you mean?" Again, the fish-man was agitated.
    "Never have philosophy and culture had such a patroness," Scytale said. "Pleasure and beauty unite in --" 
    "What is enduring about beauty and pleasure?" Edric demanded. "We will destroy both Atreides. Culture! They dispense culture the better to rule. Beauty! They promote the beauty which enslaves. They create a literate ignorance -- easiest thing of all. They leave nothing to chance. Chains! Everything they do forges chains, enslaves. But slaves always revolt."
    "The sister may wed and produce offspring," Scytale said.
    "Why do you speak of the sister?" Edric asked.
    "The Emperor may choose a mate for her," Scytale said.
    "Let him choose. Already, it is too late." 
    "Even you cannot invent the next moment," Scytale warned. "You are not a creator . . . any more than are the Atreides." He nodded. "We must not presume too much." 
    "We aren't the ones to flap our tongues about creation," Edric protested. "We aren't the rabble trying to make a messiah out of Muad'dib. What is this nonsense? Why are you raising such questions?" 
    "It's this planet," Scytale said. "It raises questions." 
    "Planets don't speak!" 
    "This one does." 
    "Oh?"
    "It speaks of creation. Sand blowing in the night, that is creation." 
    "Sand blowing . . . "
    "When you awaken, the first light shows you the new world -- all fresh and ready for your tracks." 
    Untracked sand? Edric thought. Creation? He felt knotted with sudden anxiety. The confinement of his tank, the surrounding room, everything closed in upon him, constricted him. 
    Tracks in sand.
    "You talk like a Fremen," Edric said.
    "This is a Fremen thought and it's instructive," Scytale agreed. "They speak of Muad'dib's Jihad as leaving tracks in the universe in the same way that a Fremen tracks new sand. They've marked out a trail in men's lives." 
    "So?"
    "Another night comes," Scytale said. "Winds blow." 
    "Yes," Edric said, "the Jihad is finite. Muad'dib has used his Jihad and --"
    "He didn't use the Jihad," Scytale said. "The Jihad used him. I think he would've stopped it if he could." 
    "If he could? All he had to do was --"
    "Oh, be still!" Scytale barked. "You can't stop a mental epidemic. It leaps from person to person across parsecs. It's overwhelmingly contagious. It strikes at the unprotected side, in the place where we lodge the fragments of other such plagues. Who can stop such a thing? Muad'dib hasn't the antidote. The thing has roots in chaos. Can orders reach there?"
    "Have you been infected, then?" Edric asked. He turned slowly in the orange gas, wondering why Scytale's words carried such a tone of fear. Had the Face Dancer broken from the conspiracy? There was no way to peer into the future and examine this now. The future had become a muddy stream, clogged with prophets.
    "We're all contaminated," Scytale said, and he reminded himself that Edric's intelligence had severe limits. How could this point be made that the Guildsman would understand it?
    "But when we destroy him," Edric said, "the contag --" 
    "I should leave you in this ignorance," Scytale said. "But my duties will not permit it. Besides, it's dangerous to all of us."
    Edric recoiled, steadied himself with a kick of one webbed foot which sent the orange gas whipping around his legs. "You speak strangely," he said.
    "This whole thing is explosive," Scytale said in a calmer voice. "It's ready to shatter. When it goes, it will send bits of itself out through the centuries. Don't you see this?"
    "We've dealt with religions before," Edric protested. "If this new --"
    "It is not just a religion!" Scytale said, wondering what the Reverend Mother would say to this harsh education of their fellow conspirator. "Religious government is something else. Muad'dib has crowded his Qizarate in everywhere, displaced the old functions of government. But he has no permanent civil service, no interlocking embassies. He has bishoprics, islands of authority. At the center of each island is a man. Men learn how to gain and hold personal power. Men are jealous."
    "When they're divided, we'll absorb them one by one," Edric said with a complacent smile. "Cut off the head and the body will fall to --" 
    "This body has two heads," Scytale said. 
    "The sister -- who may wed." 
    "Who will certainly wed." 
    "I don't like your tone, Scytale." 
    "And I don't like your ignorance." 
    "What if she does wed? Will that shake our plans?" 
    "It will shake the universe."
    "But they're not unique. I, myself, possess powers which --" 
    "You're an infant. You toddle where they stride." 
    "They are not unique!"
    "You forget, Guildsman, that we once made a kwisatz haderach. This is a being filled by the spectacle of Time. It is a form of existence which cannot be threatened without enclosing yourself in the identical threat. Muad'dib knows we would attack his Chani. We must move faster than we have. You must get to the ghola, prod him as I have instructed." 
    "And if I do not?" 
    "We will feel the thunderbolt."

= = = = = =

Oh, worm of many teeth,
Canst thou deny what has no cure? 
The flesh and breath which lure thee 
To the ground of all beginnings 
Feed on monsters twisting in a door of fire! 
Thou hast no robe in all thy attire 
To cover intoxications of divinity 
Or hide the burnings of desire!
-Wormsong from the Dunebook

    Paul had worked up a sweat on the practice floor using crysknife and short sword against the ghola. He stood now at a window looking down into the temple plaza, tried to imagine the scene with Chani at the clinic. She'd been taken ill at midmorning, the sixth week of her pregnancy. The medics were the best. They'd call when they had news.
    Murky afternoon sandclouds darkened the sky over the plaza. Fremen called such weather "dirty air." 
    Would the medics never call? Each second struggled past, reluctant to enter his universe.
    Waiting . . . waiting . . . The Bene Gesserit sent no word from Wallach. Deliberately delaying, of course.
    Prescient vision had recorded these moments, but he shielded his awareness from the oracle, preferring the role here of a Timefish swimming not where he willed, but where the currents carried him. Destiny permitted no struggles now.
    The ghola could be heard racking weapons, examining the equipment. Paul sighed, put a hand to his own belt, deactivated his shield. The tingling passage of its field ran down against his skin.
    He'd face events when Chani came, Paul told himself. Time enough then to accept the fact that what he'd concealed from her had prolonged her life. Was it evil, he wondered, to prefer Chani to an heir? By what right did he make her choice for her? Foolish thoughts! Who could hesitate, given the alternatives -- slave pits, torture, agonizing sorrow . . . and worse.
    He heard the door open, Chani's footsteps. 
    Paul turned.
    Murder sat on Chani's face. The wide Fremen belt which gathered the waist of her golden robe, the water rings worn as a necklace, one hand at her hip (never far from the knife), the trenchant stare which was her first inspection of any room -- everything about her stood now only as a background for violence.
    He opened his arms as she came to him, gathered her close.
    "Someone," she rasped, speaking against his breast, "has been feeding me a contraceptive for a long time . . . before I began the new diet. There'll be problems with this birth because of it."
    "But there are remedies?" he asked.
    "Dangerous remedies. I know the source of that poison! I'll have her blood."
    "My Sihaya," he whispered, holding her close to calm a sudden trembling. "You'll bear the heir we want. Isn't that enough?"
    "My life burns faster," she said, pressing against him. "The birth now controls my life. The medics told me it goes at a terrible pace. I must eat and eat . . . and take more spice, as well . . . eat it, drink it. I'll kill her for this!" 
    Paul kissed her cheek. "No, my Sihaya. You'll kill no one." And he thought: Irulan prolonged your life, beloved. For you, the time of birth is the time of death.
    He felt hidden grief drain his marrow then, empty his life into a black flask.
    Chani pushed away from him. "She cannot be forgiven!" 
    "Who said anything about forgiving?" 
    "They why shouldn't I kill her?"
    It was such a flat, Fremen question that Paul felt himself almost overcome by a hysterical desire to laugh. He covered it by saying: "It wouldn't help." 
    "You've seen that?" 
    Paul felt his belly tighten with vision-memory.
    "What I've seen . . . what I've seen . . ." he muttered. Every aspect of surrounding events fitted a present which paralyzed him. He felt chained to a future which, exposed too often, had locked onto him like a greedy succubus. Tight dryness clogged his throat. Had he followed the witchcall of his own oracle, he wondered, until it'd spilled him into a merciless present?
    "Tell me what you've seen," Chani said. 
    "I can't." 
    "Why mustn't I kill her?" 
    "Because I ask it."
    He watched her accept this. She did it the way sand accepted water: absorbing and concealing. Was there obedience beneath that hot, angry surface? he wondered. And he realized then that life in the royal Keep had left Chani unchanged. She'd merely stopped here for a time, inhabited a way station on a journey with her man. Nothing of the desert had been taken from her.
    Chani stepped away from him then, glanced at the ghola who stood waiting near the diamond circle of the practice door.
    "You've been crossing blades with him?" she asked. 
    "And I'm better for it."
    Her gaze went to the circle on the floor, back to the ghola's metallic eyes.
    "I don't like it," she said.
    "He's not intended to do me violence," Paul said. 
    "You've seen that?" 
    "I've not seen it!" 
    "Then how do you know?"
    "Because he's more than ghola; he's Duncan Idaho." 
    "The Bene Tleilax made him." 
    "They made more than they intended."
    She shook her head. A corner of her nezhoni scarf rubbed the collar of her robe. "How can you change the fact that he is ghola?"
    "Hayt," Paul said, "are you the tool of my undoing?" 
    "If the substance of here and now is changed, the future is changed," the ghola said.
    "That is no answer!" Chani objected. 
    Paul raised his voice: "How will I die, Hayt?" 
    Light glinted from the artificial eyes. "It is said, m'Lord, that you will die of money and power." 
    Chani stiffened. "How dare he speak thus to you?" 
    "The mentat is truthful," Paul said. 
    "Was Duncan Idaho a real friend?" she asked. 
    "He gave his life for me."
    "It is sad," Chani whispered, "that a ghola cannot be restored to his original being."
    "Would you convert me?" the ghola asked, directing his gaze to Chani.
    "What does he mean?" Chani asked.
    "To be converted is to be turned around," Paul said. "But there's no going back." 
    "Every man carries his own past with him," Hayt said. 
    "And every ghola?" Paul asked. 
    "In a way, m'Lord."
    "Then what of that past in your secret flesh?" Paul asked.
    Chani saw how the question disturbed the ghola. His movements quickened, hands clenched into fists. She glanced at Paul, wondering why he probed thus. Was there a way to restore this creature to the man he'd been?
    "Has a ghola ever remembered his real past?" Chani asked.
    "Many attempts have been made," Hayt said, his gaze fixed on the floor near his feet. "No ghola has ever been restored to his former being." 
    "But you long for this to happen," Paul said.
    The blank surfaces of the ghola's eyes came up to center on Paul with a pressing intensity. "Yes!" 
    Voice soft, Paul said: "If there's a way . . ." 
    "This flesh," Hayt said, touching left hand to forehead in a curious saluting movement, "is not the flesh of my original birth. It is . . . reborn. Only the shape is familiar. A Face Dancer might do as well."
    "Not as well," Paul said. "And you're not a Face Dancer." 
    "That is true, m'Lord." 
    "Whence comes your shape?" 
    "The genetic imprint of the original cells." 
    "Somewhere," Paul said, "there's a plastic something which remembers the shape of Duncan Idaho. It's said the ancients probed this region before the Butlerian Jihad. What's the extent of this memory, Hayt? What did it learn from the original?" 
    The ghola shrugged.
    "What if he wasn't Idaho?" Chani asked. 
    "He was." 
    "Can you be certain?" she asked.
    "He is Duncan in every aspect. I cannot imagine a force strong enough to hold that shape thus without any relaxation or any deviation."
    "M'Lord!" Hayt objected. "Because we cannot imagine a thing, that doesn't exclude it from reality. There are things I must do as a ghola that I would not do as a man." 
    Keeping his attention on Chani, Paul said: "You see?" She nodded.
    Paul turned away, fighting deep sadness. He crossed to the balcony windows, drew the draperies. Lights came on in the sudden gloom. He pulled the sash of his robe tight, listened for sounds behind him. 
    Nothing.
    He turned. Chani stood as though entranced, her gaze centered on the ghola.
    Hayt, Paul saw, had retreated to some inner chamber of his being -- had gone back to the ghola place.
    Chani turned at the sound of Paul's return. She still felt the thralldom of the instant Paul had precipitated. For a brief moment, the ghola had been an intense, vital human being. For that moment, he had been someone she did not fear -- indeed, someone she liked and admired. Now, she understood Paul's purpose in this probing. He had wanted her to see the man in the ghola flesh.
    She stared at Paul. "That man, was that Duncan Idaho?" 
    "That was Duncan Idaho. He is still there." 
    "Would he have allowed Irulan to go on living?" Chani asked.
    The water didn't sink too deep, Paul thought. And he said: "If I commanded it."
    "I don't understand," she said. "Shouldn't you be angry?" 
    "I am angry."
    "You don't sound . . . angry. You sound sorrowful." 
    He closed his eyes. "Yes. That, too."
    "You're my man," she said. "I know this, but suddenly I don't understand you."
    Abruptly, Paul felt that he walked down a long cavern. His flesh moved -- one foot and then another -- but his thoughts went elsewhere. "I don't understand myself," he whispered. When he opened his eyes, he found that he had moved away from Chani.
    She spoke from somewhere behind him. "Beloved, I'll not ask again what you've seen. I only know I'm to give you the heir we want."
    He nodded, then: "I've known that from the beginning." He turned, studied her. Chani seemed very far away.
    She drew herself up, placed a hand on her abdomen. "I'm hungry. The medics tell me I must eat three or four times what I ate before. I'm frightened, beloved. It goes too fast."
    Too fast, he agreed. This fetus knows the necessity for speed.

= = = = = =

The audacious nature of Muad'dib's actions may be seen in the fact that He knew from the beginning whither He was bound, yet not once did He step aside from that path. He put it clearly when He said: "I tell you that I come now to my time of testing when it will be shown that I am the Ultimate Servant." Thus He weaves all into One, that both friend and foe may worship Him. It is for this reason and this reason only that His Apostles prayed: "Lord, save us from the other paths which Muad'dib covered with the Waters of His Life. " Those "other paths" may be imagined only with the deepest revulsion.
-from The Yiam-el-Din (Book of Judgment)

    The messenger was a young woman -- her face, name and family known to Chani -- which was how she'd penetrated Imperial Security.
    Chani had done no more than identify her for a Security Officer named Bannerjee, who then arranged the meeting with Muad'dib. Bannerjee acted out of instinct and the assurance that the young woman's father had been a member of the Emperor's Death Commandos, the dreaded Fedaykin, in the days before the Jihad. Otherwise, he might have ignored her plea that her message was intended only for the ears of Muad'dib.
    She was, of course, screened and searched before the meeting in Paul's private office. Even so, Bannerjee accompanied her, hand on knife, other hand on her arm.
    It was almost midday when they brought her into the room -- an odd space, mixture of desert-Fremen and Family-Aristocrat. Hiereg hangings lined three walls: delicate tapestries adorned with figures out of Fremen mythology. A view screen covered the fourth wall, a silver-gray surface behind an oval desk whose top held only one object, a Fremen sandclock built into an orrery. The orrery, a suspensor mechanism from lx, carried both moons of Arrakis in the classic Worm Trine aligned with the sun.
    Paul, standing beside the desk, glanced at Bannerjee. The Security Officer was one of those who'd come up through the Fremen Constabulary, winning his place on brains and proven loyalty despite the smuggler ancestry attested by his name. He was a solid figure, almost fat. Wisps of black hair fell down over the dark, wet-appearing skin of his forehead like the crest of an exotic bird. His eyes were blue-blue and steady in a gaze which could look upon happiness or atrocity without change of expression. Both Chani and Stilgar trusted him. Paul knew that if he told Bannerjee to throttle the girl immediately, Bannerjee would do it.
    "Sire, here is the messenger girl," Bannerjee said. "M'Lady Chani said she sent word to you." 
    "Yes." Paul nodded curtly.
    Oddly, the girl didn't look at him. Her attention remained on the orrery. She was dark-skinned, of medium height, her figure concealed beneath a robe whose rich wine fabric and simple cut spoke of wealth. Her blue-black hair was held in a narrow band of material which matched the robe. The robe concealed her hands. Paul suspected that the hands were tightly clasped. It would be in character. Everything about her would be in character -- including the robe: a last piece of finery saved for such a moment.
    Paul motioned Bannerjee aside. He hesitated before obeying. Now, the girl moved -- one step forward. When she moved there was grace. Still, her eyes avoided him. 
    Paul cleared his throat.
    Now the girl lifted her gaze, the whiteless eyes widening with just the right shade of awe. She had an odd little face with delicate chin, a sense of reserve in the way she held her small mouth. The eyes appeared abnormally large above slanted cheeks. There was a cheerless air about her, something which said she seldom smiled. The corners of her eyes even held a faint yellow misting which could have been from dust irritation or the tracery of semuta. 
    Everything was in character. 
    "You asked to see me," Paul said.
    The moment of supreme test for this girl-shape had come. Scytale had put on the shape, the mannerisms, the sex, the voice -- everything his abilities could grasp and assume. But this was a female known to Muad'dib in the sietch days. She'd been a child, then, but she and Muad'dib shared common experiences. Certain areas of memory must be avoided delicately. It was the most exacting part Scytale had ever attempted. 
    "I am Otheym's Lichna of Berk al Dib." 
    The girl's voice came out small, but firm, giving name, father and pedigree.
    Paul nodded. He saw how Chani had been fooled. The timbre of voice, everything reproduced with exactitude. Had it not been for his own Bene Gesserit training in voice and for the web of dao in which oracular vision enfolded him, this Face-Dancer disguise might have gulled even him.
    Training exposed certain discrepancies: the girl was older than her known years; too much control tuned the vocal cords; set of neck and shoulders missed by a fraction the subtle hauteur of Fremen poise. But there were niceties, too: the rich robe had been patched to betray actual status . . . and the features were beautifully exact. They spoke a certain sympathy of this Face Dancer for the role being played.
    "Rest in my home, daughter of Otheym," Paul said in formal Fremen greeting. "You are welcome as water after a dry crossing."
    The faintest of relaxations exposed the confidence this apparent acceptance had conveyed. 
    "I bring a message," she said.
    "A man's messenger is as himself," Paul said.
    Scytale breathed softly. It went well, but now came the crucial task: the Atreides must be guided onto that special path. He must lose his Fremen concubine in circumstances where no other shared the blame. The failure must belong only to the omnipotent Muad'dib. He had to be led into an ultimate realization of his failure and thence to acceptance of the Tleilaxu alternative.
    "I am the smoke which banishes sleep in the night," Scytale said, employing a Fedaykin code phrase: I bear bad tidings.
    Paul fought to maintain calmness. He felt naked, his soul abandoned in a groping-time concealed from every vision. Powerful oracles hid this Face Dancer. Only the edges of these moments were known to Paul. He knew only what he could not do. He could not slay this Face Dancer. That would precipitate the future which must be avoided at all cost. Somehow, a way must be found to reach into the darkness and change the terrifying pattern. 
    "Give me your message," Paul said.
    Bannerjee moved to place himself where he could watch the girl's face. She seemed to notice him for the First time and her gaze went to the knife handle beneath the Security Officer's hand.
    "The innocent do not believe in evil," she said, looking squarely at Bannerjee.
    Ahhh, well done, Paul thought. It was what the real Lichna would've said. He felt a momentary pang for the real daughter of Otheym -- dead now, a corpse in the sand. There was no time for such emotions, though. He scowled.
    Bannerjee kept his attention on the girl. 
    "I was told to deliver my message in secret," she said. 
    "Why?" Bannerjee demanded, voice harsh, probing. 
    "Because it is my father's wish."
    "This is my friend," Paul said. "Am I not a Fremen? Then my friend may hear anything I hear." 
    Scytale composed the girl-shape. Was this a true Fremen custom . . . or was it a test?
    "The Emperor may make his own rules," Scytale said. "This is the message: My father wishes you to come to him, bringing Chani." 
    "Why must I bring Chani?"
    "She is your woman and a Sayyadina. This is a Water matter, by the rules of our tribes. She must attest it that my father speaks according to the Fremen Way." 
    There truly are Fremen in the conspiracy, Paul thought. This moment fitted the shape of things to come for sure. And he had no alternative but to commit himself to this course.
    "Of what will your father speak?" Paul asked.
    "He will speak of a plot against you -- a plot among the Fremen."
    "Why doesn't he bring that message in person?" Bannerjee demanded.
    She kept her gaze on Paul. "My father cannot come here. The plotters suspect him. He'd not survive the journey."
    "Could he not divulge the plot to you?" Bannerjee asked. "How came he to risk his daughter on such a mission?"
    "The details are locked in a distrans carrier that only Muad'dib may open," she said. "This much I know." 
    "Why not send the distrans, then?" Paul asked. 
    "It is a human distrans," she said.
    "I'll go, then," Paul said. "But I'll go alone." 
    "Chani must come with you!" 
    "Chani is with child." 
    "When has a Fremen woman refused to . . ." 
    "My enemies fed her a subtle poison," Paul said. "It will be a difficult birth. Her health will not permit her to accompany me now."
    Before Scytale could still them, strange emotions passed over the girl-features: frustration, anger. Scytale was reminded that every victim must have a way of escape -- even such a one as Muad'dib. The conspiracy had not failed, though. This Atreides remained in the net. He was a creature who had developed firmly into one pattern. He'd destroy himself before changing into the opposite of that pattern. That had been the way with the Tleilaxu kwisatz haderach. It'd be the way with this one. And then . . . the ghola.
    "Let me ask Chani to decide this," she said.
    "I have decided it," Paul said. "You will accompany me in Chani's stead." 
    "It requires a Sayyadina of the Rite!" 
    "Are you not Chani's friend?"
    Boxed! Scytale thought. Does he suspect? No. He's being Fremen-cautious. And the contraceptive is a fact. Well -- there are other ways.
    "My father told me I was not to return," Scytale said, "that I was to seek asylum with you. He said you'd not risk me."
    Paul nodded. It was beautifully in character. He couldn't deny this asylum. She'd plead Fremen obedience to a father's command.
    "I'll take Stilgar's wife, Harah," Paul said. "You'll tell us the way to your father." 
    "How do you know you can trust Stilgar's wife?" 
    "I know it." 
    "But I don't."
    Paul pursed his lips, then: "Does your mother live?" 
    "My true mother has gone to Shai-hulud. My second mother still lives and cares for my father. Why?" 
    "She's of Sietch Tabr?" 
    "Yes."
    "I remember her," Paul said. "She will serve in Chani's place." He motioned to Bannerjee. "Have attendants take Otheym's Lichna to suitable quarters."
    Bannerjee nodded. Attendants. The key word meant that this messenger must be put under special guard. He took her arm. She resisted.
    "How will you go to my father?" she pleaded.
    "You'll describe the way to Bannerjee," Paul said. "He is my friend."
    "No! My father has commanded it! I cannot!" 
    "Bannerjee?" Paul said.
    Bannerjee paused. Paul saw the man searching that encyclopedic memory which had helped bring him to his position of trust. "I know a guide who can take you to Otheym," Bannerjee said.
    "Then I'll go alone," Paul said. 
    "Sire, if you . . . "
    "Otheym wants it this way," Paul said, barely concealing the irony which consumed him. 
    "Sire, it's too dangerous," Bannerjee protested.
    "Even an Emperor must accept some risks," Paul said. "The decision is made. Do as I've commanded."
    Reluctantly, Bannerjee led the Face Dancer from the room.
    Paul turned toward the blank screen behind his desk. He felt that he waited for the arrival of a rock on its blind journey from some height.
    Should he tell Bannerjee about the messenger's true nature? he wondered. No! Such an incident hadn't been written on the screen of his vision. Any deviation here carried precipitate violence. A moment of fulcrum had to be found, a place where he could will himself out of the vision.
    If such a moment existed . . .

= = = = = =

No matter how exotic human civilization becomes, no matter the developments of life and society nor the complexity of the machine / human interface, there always come interludes of lonely power when the course of humankind, the very future of humankind, depends upon the relatively simple actions of single individuals.
-from The Tlielaxu Godbuk

    As he crossed over on the high footbridge from his Keep to the Qizarate Office Building, Paul added a limp to his walk. It was almost sunset and he walked through long shadows that helped conceal him, but sharp eyes still might detect something in his carriage that identified him. He wore a shield, but it was not activated, his aides having decided that the shimmer of it might arouse suspicions. 
    Paul glanced left. Strings of sandclouds lay across the sunset like slatted shutters. The air was hiereg dry through his stillsuit filters.
    He wasn't really alone out here, but the web of Security hadn't been this loose around him since he'd ceased walking the streets alone in the night. Ornithopters with night scanners drifted far overhead in seemingly random pattern, all of them tied to his movements through a transmitter concealed in his clothing. Picked men walked the streets below. Others had fanned out through the city after seeing the Emperor in his disguise -- Fremen costume down to the stillsuit and temag desert boots, the darkened features. His cheeks had been distorted with plastene inserts. A catchtube ran down along his left jaw.
    As he reached the opposite end of the bridge, Paul glanced back, noted a movement beside the stone lattice that concealed a balcony of his private quarters. Chani, no doubt. "Hunting for sand in the desert," she'd called this venture.
    How little she understood the bitter choice. Selecting among agonies, he thought, made even lesser agonies near unbearable.
    For a blurred, emotionally painful moment, he relived their parting. At the last instant, Chani had experienced a tau-glimpse of his feelings, but she had misinterpreted. She had thought his emotions were those experienced in the parting of loved ones when one entered the dangerous unknown.
    Would that I did not know, he thought.
    He had crossed the bridge now and entered the upper passageway through the office building. There were fixed glowglobes here and people hurrying on business. The Qizarate never slept. Paul found his attention caught by the signs above doorways, as though he were seeing them for the first time: Speed Merchants. Wind Stills and Retorts. Prophetic Prospects. Tests of Faith. Religious Supply. Weaponry . . . Propagation of the Faith . . . 
    A more honest label would've been Propagation of the Bureaucracy, he thought.
    A type of religious civil servant had sprung up all through his universe. This new man of the Qizarate was more often a convert. He seldom displaced a Freman in the key posts, but he was filling all the interstices. He used melange as much to show he could afford it as for the geriatric benefits. He stood apart from his rulers -- Emperor, Guild, Bene Gesserit, Landsraad, Family or Qizarate. His gods were Routine and Records. He was served by mentats and prodigious filing systems. Expediency was the first word in his catechism, although he gave proper lip-service to the precepts of the Butlerians. Machines could not be fashioned in the image of a man's mind, he said, but he betrayed by every action that he preferred machines to men, statistics to individuals, the faraway general view to the intimate personal touch requiring imagination and initiative.
    As Paul emerged onto the ramp at the far side of the building, he heard the bells calling the Evening Rite at Alia's Fane.
    There was an odd feeling of permanence about the bells.
    The temple across the thronged square was new, its rituals of recent devising, but there was something about this setting in a desert sink at the edge of Arrakeen -- something in the way wind-driven sand had begun to weather stones and plastene, something in the haphazard way buildings had gone up around the Fane. Everything conspired to produce the impression that this was a very old place full of traditions and mystery.
    He was down into the press of people now -- committed. The only guide his Security force could find had insisted it be done this way. Security hadn't liked Paul's ready agreement. Stilgar had liked it even less. And Chani had objected most of all.
    The crowd around him, even while its members brushed against him, glanced his way unseeing and passed on, gave him a curious freedom of movement. It was the way they'd been conditioned to treat a Fremen, he knew. He carried himself like a man of the inner desert. Such men were quick to anger.
    As he moved into the quickening flow to the temple steps, the crush of people became even greater. Those all around could not help but press against him now, but he found himself the target for ritual apologies: "Your pardon, noble sir. I cannot prevent this discourtesy." "Pardon, sir; this crush of people is the worst I've ever seen." "I abase myself, holy citizen. A lout shoved me." 
    Paul ignored the words after the first few. There was no feeling in them except a kind of ritual fear. He found himself, instead, thinking that he had come a long way from his boyhood days in Caladan Castle. Where had he put his foot on the path that led to this journey across a crowded square on a planet so far from Caladan? Had he really put his foot on a path? He could not say he had acted at any point in his life for one specific reason. The motives and impinging forces had been complex -- more complex possibly than any other set of goads in human history. He had the heady feeling here that he might still avoid the fate he could see so clearly along this path. But the crowd pushed him forward and he experienced the dizzy sense that he had lost his way, lost personal direction over his life.
    The crowd flowed with him up the steps now into the temple portico. Voices grew hushed. The smell of fear grew stronger -- acrid, sweaty.
    Acolytes had already begun the service within the temple. Their plain chant dominated the other sounds -- whispers, rustle of garments, shuffling feet, coughs -- telling the story of the Far Places visited by the Priestess in her holy trance.

"She rides the sandworm of space! 
She guides through all storms 
Into the land of gentle winds. 
Though we sleep by the snake's den, 
She guards our dreaming souls. 
Shunning the desert heat, 
She hides us in a cool hollow.
The gleaming of her white teeth
Guides us in the night.
By the braids of her hair
We are lifted up to heaven!
Sweet fragrance, flower-scented.
Surrounds us in her presence."

    Balak! Paul thought, thinking in Fremen. Look out! She can be filled with angry passion, too.
    The temple portico was lined with tall, slender glow-tubes simulating candle flame. They flickered. The flickering stirred ancestral memories in Paul even while he knew that was the intent. This setting was an atavism, subtly contrived, effective. He hated his own hand in it.
    The crowd flowed with him through tall metal doors into the gigantic nave, a gloomy place with the flickering lights far away overhead, a brilliantly illuminated altar at the far end. Behind the altar, a deceptively simple affair of black wood encrusted with sand patterns from the Fremen mythology, hidden lights played on the field of a pru-door to create a rainbow borealis. The seven rows of chanting acolytes ranked below that spectral curtain took on an eerie quality: black robes, white faces, mouths moving in unison.
    Paul studied the pilgrims around him, suddenly envious of their intentness, their air of listening to truths he could not hear. It seemed to him that they gained something here which was denied to him, something mysteriously healing.
    He tried to inch his way closer to the altar, was stopped by a hand on his arm. Paul whipped his gaze around, met the probing stare of an ancient Fremen -- blue-blue eyes beneath overhanging brows, recognition in them. A name flashed into Paul's mind: Rasir, a companion from the sietch days.
    In the press of the crowd, Paul knew he was completely vulnerable if Rasir planned violence.
    The old man pressed close, one hand beneath a sand-grimed robe -- grasping the hilt of a crysknife, no doubt. Paul set himself as best he could to resist attack. The old man moved his head toward Paul's ear, whispered: "We will go with the others." 
    It was the signal to identify his guide. Paul nodded. 
    Rasir drew back, faced the altar.
    "She comes from the east," the acolytes chanted. "The sun stands at her back. All things are exposed. In the full glare of light -- her eyes miss no thing, neither light nor dark."
    A wailing rebaba jarred across the voices, stilled them, receded into silence. With an electric abruptness, the crowd surged forward several meters. They were packed into a tight mass of flesh now, the air heavy with their breathing and the scent of spice.
    "Shai-hulud writes on clean sand!" the acolytes shouted.
    Paul felt his own breath catch in unison with those around him. A feminine chorus began singing faintly from the shadows behind the shimmering pru-door: "Alia . . . Alia . . . Alia . . . " It grew louder and louder, fell to a sudden silence.
    Again -- voices beginning vesper-soft:

"She stills all storms --  
Her eyes kill our enemies, 
And torment the unbelievers. 
From the spires of Tuono 
Where dawnlight strikes 
And clear water runs, 
You see her shadow.
In the shining summer heat 
She serves us bread and milk --  
Cool, fragrant with spices. 
Her eyes melt our enemies, 
Torment our oppressors 
And pierce all mysteries.
She is Alia . . . Alia . . . Alia . . . "

    Slowly, the voices trailed off.
    Paul felt sickened. What are we doing? he asked himself. Alia was a child witch, but she was growing older. And he thought: Growing older is to grow more wicked.
    The collective mental atmosphere of the temple ate at his psyche. He could sense that element of himself which was one with those all around him, but the differences formed a deadly contradiction. He stood immersed, isolated in a personal sin which he could never expiate. The immensity of the universe outside the temple flooded his awareness. How could one man, one ritual, hope to knit such immensity into a garment fitted to all men? 
    Paul shuddered.
    The universe opposed him at every step. It eluded his grasp, conceived countless disguises to delude him. That universe would never agree with any shape he gave it. 
    A profound hush spread through the temple.
    Alia emerged from the darkness behind the shimmering rainbows. She wore a yellow robe trimmed in Atreides green -- yellow for sunlight, green for the death which produced life. Paul experienced the sudden surprising thought that Alia had emerged here just for him, for him alone. He stared across the mob in the temple at his sister. She was his sister. He knew her ritual and its roots, but he had never before stood out here with the pilgrims, watched her through their eyes. Here, performing the mystery of this place, he saw that she partook of the universe which opposed him. 
    Acolytes brought her a golden chalice. 
    Alia raised the chalice.
    With part of his awareness, Paul knew that the chalice contained the unaltered melange, the subtle poison, her sacrament of the oracle.
    Her gaze on the chalice, Alia spoke. Her voice caressed the ears, flower sound, flowing and musical: 
    "In the beginning, we were empty," she said. 
    "Ignorant of all things," the chorus sang.
    "We did not know the Power that abides in every place," Alia said.
    "And in every Time " the chorus sang.
    "Here is the Power," Alia said, raising the chalice slightly.
    "It brings us joy," sang the chorus. 
    And it brings us distress, Paul thought. 
    "It awakens the soul," Alia said. 
    "It dispels all doubts," the chorus sang. 
    "In worlds, we perish," Alia said.
    "In the Power, we survive," sang the chorus. 
    Alia put the chalice to her lips, drank.
    To his astonishment, Paul found he was holding his breath like the meanest pilgrim of this mob. Despite every shred of personal knowledge about the experience Alia was undergoing, he had been caught in the tao-web. He felt himself remembering how that fiery poison coursed into the body. Memory unfolded the time-stopping when awareness became a mote which changed the poison. He reexperienced the awakening into timelessness where all things were possible. He knew Alia's present experience, yet he saw now that he did not know it. Mystery blinded the eyes.
    Alia trembled, sank to her knees.
    Paul exhaled with the enraptured pilgrims. He nodded. Part of the veil began to lift from him. Absorbed in the bliss of a vision, he had forgotten that each vision belonged to all those who were still on-the-way, still to become. In the vision, one passed through a darkness, unable to distinguish reality from insubstantial accident. One hungered for absolutes which could never be.
    Hungering, one lost the present.
    Alia swayed with the rapture of spice change.
    Paul felt that some transcendental presence spoke to him, saying: "Look! See there! See what you've ignored?" In that instant, he thought he looked through other eyes, that he saw an imagery and rhythm in this place which no artist or poet could reproduce. It was vital and beautiful, a glaring light that exposed all power-gluttony . . . even his own.
    Alia spoke. Her amplified voice boomed across the nave.
    "Luminous night," she cried.
    A moan swept like a wave through the crush of pilgrims.
    "Nothing hides in such a night!" Alia said. "What rare light is this darkness? You cannot fix your gaze upon it! Senses cannot record it. No words describe it." Her voice lowered. "The abyss remains. It is pregnant with all the things yet to be. Ahhhhh, what gentle violence!" 
    Paul felt that he waited for some private signal from his sister. It could be any action or word, something of wizardry and mystical processes, an outward streaming that would fit him like an arrow into a cosmic bow. This instant lay like quivering mercury in his awareness.
    "There will be sadness," Alia intoned. "I remind you that all things are but a beginning, forever beginning. Worlds wait to be conquered. Some within the sound of my voice will attain exalted destinies. You will sneer at the past, forgetting what I tell you now: within all differences there is unity."
    Paul suppressed a cry of disappointment as Alia lowered her head. She had not said the thing he waited to hear. His body felt like a dry shell, a husk abandoned by some desert insect.
    Others must feel something similar, he thought. He sensed the restlessness about him. Abruptly, a woman in the mob, someone far down in the nave to Paul's left, cried out, a wordless noise of anguish.
    Alia lifted her head and Paul had the giddy sensation that the distance between them collapsed, that he stared directly into her glazed eyes -- only inches away from her. 
    "Who summons me?" Alia asked.
    "I do," the woman cried. "I do, Alia. Oh, Alia, help me. They say my son was killed on Muritan. Is he gone? Will I never see my son again . . . never?"
    "You try to walk backward in the sand," Alia intoned. "Nothing is lost. Everything returns later, but you may not recognize the changed form that returns." 
    "Alia, I don't understand!" the woman wailed.
    "You live in the air but you do not see it," Alia said, sharpness in her voice. "Are you a lizard? Your voice has the Fremen accent. Does a Fremen try to bring back the dead? What do we need from our dead except their water?"
    Down in the center of the nave, a man in a rich red cloak lifted both hands, the sleeves falling to expose white-clad arms. "Alia," he shouted, "I have had a business proposal. Should I accept?"
    "You come here like a beggar," Alia said. "You look for the golden bowl but you will find only a dagger." 
    "I have been asked to kill a man!" a voice shouted from off to the right -- a deep voice with sietch tones. "Should I accept? Accepting, would I succeed?"
    "Beginning and end are a single thing," Alia snapped. "Have I not told you this before? You didn't come here to ask that question. What is it you cannot believe that you must come here and cry out against it?"
    "She's in a fierce mood tonight," a woman near Paul muttered. "Have you ever seen her this angry?" 
    She knows I'm out here, Paul thought. Did she see something in the vision that angered her? Is she raging at me?
    "Alia," a man directly in front of Paul called. "Tell these businessmen and faint-hearts how long your brother will rule!"
    "I permit you to look around that corner by yourself," Alia snarled. "You carry your prejudice in your mouth! It is because my brother rides the worm of chaos that you have roof and water!"
    With a fierce gesture, clutching her robe, Alia whirled away, strode through the shimmering ribbons of light, was lost in the darkness behind.
    Immediately, the acolytes took up the closing chant, but their rhythm was off. Obviously, they'd been caught by the unexpected ending of the rite. An incoherent mumbling arose on all sides of the crowd. Paul felt the stirring around him -- restless, dissatisfied.
    "It was that fool with his stupid question about business," a woman near Paul muttered. "The hypocrite!" 
    What had Alia seen? What track through the future?
    Something had happened here tonight, souring the rite of the oracle. Usually, the crowd clamored for Alia to answer their pitiful questions. They came as beggars to the oracle, yes. He had heard them thus many times as he'd watched, hidden in the darkness behind the altar. What had been different about this night?
    The old Fremen tugged Paul's sleeve, nodded toward the exit. The crowd already was beginning to push in that direction. Paul allowed himself to be pressed along with them, the guide's hand upon his sleeve. There was the feeling in him then that his body had become the manifestation of some power he could no longer control. He had become a non-being, a stillness which moved itself. At the core of the non-being, there he existed, allowing himself to be led through the streets of his city, following a track so familiar to his visions that it froze his heart with grief,
    I should know what Alia saw, bethought, I have seen it enough times myself. And she didn't cry out against it . . . she saw the alternatives, too.

= = = = = =

Production growth and income growth must not get out of step in my Empire. That is the substance of my command. There are to be no balance-of-payment difficulties between the different spheres of influence. And the reason for this is simply because I command it. I want to emphasize my authority in this area. I am the supreme energy-eater of this domain, and will remain so, alive or dead. My Government is the economy.
-Order in Council The Emperor Paul Muad'dib

    "I will leave you here," the old man said, taking his hand from Paul's sleeve. "It is on the right, second door from the far end. Go with Shai-hulud, Muad'dib . . . and remember when you were Usul." 
    Paul's guide slipped away into the darkness. 
    There would be Security men somewhere out there waiting to grab the guide and take the man to a place of questioning, Paul knew. But Paul found himself hoping the old Fremen would escape.
    There were stars overhead and the distant light of First Moon somewhere beyond the Shield Wall. But this place was not the open desert where a man could sight on a star to guide his course. The old man had brought him into one of the new suburbs; this much Paul recognized.
    This street now was thick with sand blown in from encroaching dunes. A dim light glowed from a single public suspensor globe far down the street. It gave enough illumination to show that this was a dead-end street.
    The air around him was thick with the smell of a reclamation still. The thing must be poorly capped for its fetid odors to escape, loosing a dangerously wasteful amount of moisture into the night air. How careless his people had grown, Paul thought. They were millionaires of water -- forgetful of the days when a man on Arrakis could have been killed for just an eighth share of the water in his body.
    Why am I hesitating? Paul wondered. It is the second door from the far end. I knew that without being told. But this thing must be played out with precision. So . . . I hesitate.
    The noise of an argument arose suddenly from the corner house on Paul's left. A woman there berated someone: the new wing of their house leaked dust, she complained. Did he think water fell from heaven? If dust came in, moisture got out.
    Some remember, Paul thought.
    He moved down the street and the quarrel faded away behind.
    Water from heaven! he thought.
    Some Fremen had seen that wonder on other worlds. He had seen it himself, had ordered it for Arrakis, but the memory of it felt like something that had occurred to another person. Rain, it was called. Abruptly, he recalled a rainstorm on his birthworld -- clouds thick and gray in the sky of Caladan, an electric storm presence, moist air, the big wet drops drumming on skylights. It ran in rivulets off the eaves. Storm drains took the water away to a river which ran muddy and turgid past the Family orchards . . . trees there with their barren branches glistening wetly.
    Paul's foot caught in a low drift of sand across the street. For an instant, he felt mud clinging to the shoes of his childhood. Then he was back in the sand, in the dust-clotted, wind-muffled darkness with the Future hanging over him, taunting. He could feel the aridity of life around him like an accusation. You did this! They'd become a civilization of dry-eyed watchers and taletellers, people who solved all problems with power . . . and more power . . . and still more power -- hating every erg of it.
    Rough stones came underfoot. His vision remembered them. The dark rectangle of a doorway appeared on his right -- black in black: Otheym's house. Fate's house, a place different from the ones around it only in the role Time had chosen for it. It was a strange place to be marked down in history.
    The door opened to his knock. The gap revealed the dull green light of an atrium. A dwarf peered out, ancient face on a child's body, an apparition prescience had never seen.
    "You've come then," the apparition said. The dwarf stepped aside, no awe in his manner, merely the gloating of a slow smile. "Come in! Come in!"
    Paul hesitated. There'd been no dwarf in the vision, but all else remained identical. Visions could contain such disparities and still hold true to their original plunge into infinity. But the difference dared him to hope. He glanced back up the street at the creamy pearl glistening of his moon swimming out of jagged shadows. The moon haunted him. How did it fall? 
    "Come in," the dwarf insisted.
    Paul entered, heard the door thud into its moisture seals behind. The dwarf passed him, led the way, enormous feet slapping the floor, opened the delicate lattice gate into the roofed central courtyard, gestured. "They await, Sire." 
    Sire, Paul thought. He knows me, then.
    Before Paul could explore this discovery, the dwarf slipped away down a side passage. Hope was a dervish wind whirling, dancing in Paul. He headed across the courtyard. It was a dark and gloomy place, the smell of sickness and defeat in it. He felt daunted by the atmosphere. Was it defeat to choose a lesser evil? he wondered. How far down this track had he come?
    Light poured from a narrow doorway in the far wall. He put down the feeling of watchers and evil smells, entered the doorway into a small room. It was a barren place by Fremen standards with heireg hangings on only two walls. Opposite the door, a man sat on carmine cushions beneath the best hanging. A feminine figure hovered in shadows behind another doorway in a barren wall to the left.
    Paul felt vision-trapped. This was the way it'd gone. Where was the dwarf? Where was the difference?
    His senses absorbed the room in a single gestalten sweep. The place had received painstaking care despite its poor furnishings. Hooks and rods across the barren walls showed where hangings had been removed. Pilgrims paid enormous prices for authentic Fremen artifacts, Paul reminded himself. Rich pilgrims counted desert tapestries as treasures, true marks of a hajj.
    Paul felt that the barren walls accused him with their fresh gypsum wash. The threadbare condition of the two remaining hangings amplified the sense of guilt.
    A narrow shelf occupied the wall on his right. It held a row of portraits -- mostly bearded Fremen, some in still-suits with their catchtubes dangling, some in Imperial uniforms posed against exotic offworld backgrounds. The most common scene was a seascape.
    The Fremen on cushions cleared his throat, forcing Paul to look at him. It was Otheym precisely as the vision had revealed him: neck grown scrawny, a bird thing which appeared too weak to support the large head. The face was a lopsided ruin -- networks of crisscrossed scars on the left cheek below a drooping, wet eye, but clear skin on the other side and a straight, blue-in-blue Fremen gaze. A long kedge of a nose bisected the face.
    Otheym's cushion sat in the center of a threadbare rug, brown with maroon and gold threads. The cushion fabric betrayed splotches of wear and patching, but every bit of metal around the seated figure shone from polishing -- the portrait frames, shelf lip and brackets, the pedestal of a low table on the right.
    Paul nodded to the clear half of Otheym's face, said: "Good luck to you and your dwelling place." It was the greeting of an old friend and sietch mate. 
    "So I see you once more, Usul."
    The voice speaking his tribal name whined with an old man's quavering. The dull drooping eye on the ruined side of the face moved above the parchment skin and scars. Gray bristles stubbled that side and the jawline there hung with scabrous peelings. Otheym's mouth twisted as he spoke, the gap exposing silvery metal teeth.
    "Muad'dib always answers the call of a Fedaykin," Paul said.
    The woman in the doorway shadows moved, said: "So Stilgar boasts."
    She came forward into the light, an older version of the Lichna which the Face Dancer had copied. Paul recalled then that Otheym had married sisters. Her hair was gray, nose grown witch-sharp. Weavers' calluses ran along her forefingers and thumbs. A Fremen woman would've displayed such marks proudly in the sietch days, but she saw his attention on her hands, hid them under a fold of her pale blue robe.
    Paul remembered her name then -- Dhuri. The shock was he remembered her as a child, not as she'd been in his vision of these moments. It was the whine that edged her voice, Paul told himself. She'd whined even as a child.
    "You see me here," Paul said. "Would I be here if Stilgar hadn't approved?" He turned toward Otheym. "I carry your water burden, Otheym. Command me." 
    This was the straight Fremen talk of sietch brothers.
    Otheym produced a shaky nod, almost too much for that thin neck. He lifted a liver-marked left hand, pointed to the ruin of his face. "I caught the splitting disease on Tarahell, Usul," he wheezed. "Right after the victory when we'd all . . ." A fit of coughing stopped his voice.
    "The tribe will collect his water soon," Dhuri said. She crossed to Otheym, propped pillows behind him, held his shoulder to steady him until the coughing passed. She wasn't really very old, Paul saw, but a look of lost hopes ringed her mouth, bitterness lay in her eyes. 
    "I'll summon doctors," Paul said.
    Dhuri turned, hand on hip. "We've had medical men, as good as any you could summon." She sent an involuntary glance to the barren wall on her left. 
    And the medical men were costly, Paul thought.
    He felt edgy, constrained by the vision but aware that minor differences had crept in. How could he exploit the differences? Time came out of its skein with subtle changes, but the background fabric held oppressive sameness. He knew with terrifying certainty that if he tried to break out of the enclosing pattern here, it'd become a thing of terrible violence. The power in this deceptively gentle flow of Time oppressed him. 
    "Say what you want of me," he growled.
    "Couldn't it be that Otheym needed a friend to stand by him in this time?" Dhuri asked. "Does a Fedaykin have to consign his flesh to strangers?"
    We shared Sietch Tabr, Paul reminded himself. She has the right to berate me for apparent callousness. 
    "What I can do I will do," Paul said.
    Another fit of coughing shook Otheym. When it had passed, he gasped: "There's treachery, Usul. Fremen plot against you." His mouth worked then without sound. Spittle escaped his lips. Dhuri wiped his mouth with a corner of her robe, and Paul saw how her face betrayed anger at such waste of moisture.
    Frustrated rage threatened to overwhelm Paul then. That Otheym should be spent thus! A Fedaykin deserved better. But no choice remained -- not for a Death Commando or his Emperor. They walked Occam's razor in this room. The slightest misstep multiplied horrors -- not just for themselves, but for all humankind, even for those who would destroy them.
    Paul squeezed calmness into his mind, looked at Dhuri. The expression of terrible longing with which she gazed at Otheym strengthened Paul. Chani must never look at me that way, he told himself. 
    "Lichna spoke of a message," Paul said.
    "My dwarf," Otheym wheezed. "I bought him on . . . on . . . on a world . . . I forget. He's a human distrans, a toy discarded by the Tleilaxu. He's recorded all the names . . . the traitors . . ." 
    Otheym fell silent, trembling.
    "You speak of Lichna," Dhuri said. "When you arrived, we knew she'd reached you safely. If you're thinking of this new burden Otheym places upon you, Lichna is the sum of that burden. An even exchange, Usul: take the dwarf and go."
    Paul suppressed a shudder, closed his eyes. Lichna! The real daughter had perished in the desert, a semuta-wracked body abandoned to the sand and the wind.
    Opening his eyes, Paul said: "You could've come to me at any time for . . ."
    "Otheym stayed away that he might be numbered among those who hate you, Usul," Dhuri said. "The house to the south of us at the end of the street, that is a gathering place for your foes. It's why we took this hovel." 
    "Then summon the dwarf and we'll leave," Paul said. 
    "You've not listened well," Dhuri said.
    "You must take the dwarf to a safe place," Otheym said, an odd strength in his voice. "He carries the only record of the traitors. No one suspects his talent. They think I keep him for amusement."
    "We cannot leave," Dhuri said. "Only you and the dwarf. It's known . . . how poor we are. We've said we're selling the dwarf. They'll take you for the buyer. It's your only chance."
    Paul consulted his memory of the vision: in it, he'd left here with the names of the traitors, but never seeing how those names were carried. The dwarf obviously moved under the protection of another oracle. It occurred to Paul then that all creatures must carry some kind of destiny stamped out by purposes of varying strengths, by the fixation of training and disposition. From the moment the Jihad had chosen him, he'd felt himself hemmed in by the forces of a multitude. Their fixed purposes demanded and controlled his course. Any delusions of Free Will he harbored now must be merely the prisoner rattling his cage. His curse lay in the fact that he saw the cage. He saw it!
    He listened now to the emptiness of this house: only the four of them in it -- Dhuri, Otheym, the dwarf and himself. He inhaled the fear and tension of his companions, sensed the watchers -- his own force hovering in 'thopters far overhead . . . and those others . . . next door.
    I was wrong to hope, Paul thought. But thinking of hope brought him a twisted sense of hope, and he felt that he might yet seize his moment. 
    "Summon the dwarf," he said. 
    "Bijaz!" Dhuri called.
    "You call me?" The dwarf stepped into the room from the courtyard, an alert expression of worry on his face.
    "You have a new master, Bijaz," Dhuri said. She stared at Paul. "You may call him . . . Usul."
    "Usul, that's the base of the pillar," Bijaz said, translating. "How can Usul be base when I'm the basest thing living?"
    "He always speaks thus," Otheym apologized.
    "I don't speak," Bijaz said. "I operate a machine called language. It creaks and groans, but is mine own." 
    A Tleilaxu toy, learned and alert, Paul thought. The Bene Tleilax never threw away something this valuable. He turned, studied the dwarf. Round melange eyes returned his stare.
    "What other talents have you, Bijaz?" Paul asked.
    "I know when we should leave," Bijaz said. "It's a talent few men have. There's a time for endings -- and that's a good beginning. Let us begin to go, Usul." 
    Paul examined his vision memory: no dwarf, but the little man's words fitted the occasion.
    "At the door, you called me Sire," Paul said. "You know me, then?"
    "You've sired, Sire," Bijaz said, grinning. "You are much more than the base Usul. You're the Atreides Emperor, Paul Muad'dib. And you are my finger." He held up the index finger of his right hand. 
    "Bijaz!" Dhuri snapped. "You tempt fate." 
    "I tempt my finger," Bijaz protested, voice squeaking. He pointed at Usul. "I point at Usul. Is my finger not Usul himself? Or is it a reflection of something more base?" He brought the finger close to his eyes, examined it with a mocking grin, first one side then the other. "Ahhh, it's merely a finger, after all."
    "He often rattles on thus," Dhuri said, worry in her voice. "I think it's why he was discarded by the Tleilaxu." 
    "I'll not be patronized," Bijaz said, "yet I have a new patron. How strange the workings of the finger." He peered at Dhuri and Otheym, eyes oddly bright. "A weak glue bound us, Otheym. A few tears and we part." The dwarfs big feet rasped on the floor as he whirled completely around, stopped facing Paul. "Ahhh, patron! I came the long way around to find you." 
    Paul nodded.
    "You'll be kind, Usul?" Bijaz asked. "I'm a person, you know. Persons come in many shapes and sizes. This be but one of them. I'm weak of muscle, but strong of mouth; cheap to feed, but costly to fill. Empty me as you will, there's still more in me than men put there." 
    "We've no time for your stupid riddles," Dhuri growled. "You should be gone."
    "I'm riddled with conundrums," Bijaz said, "but not all of them stupid. To be gone, Usul, is to be a bygone. Yes? Let us let bygones be bygones. Dhuri speaks truth, and I've the talent for hearing that, too."
    "You've truthsense?" Paul asked, determined now to wait out the clockwork of his vision. Anything was better than shattering these moments and producing the new consequences. There remained things for Otheym to say lest Time be diverted into even more horrifying channels. 
    "I've now-sense" Bijaz said.
    Paul noted that the dwarf had grown more nervous. Was the little man aware of things about to happen? Could Bijaz be his own oracle?
    "Did you inquire of Lichna?" Otheym asked suddenly, peering up at Dhuri with his one good eye. 
    "Lichna is safe," Dhuri said.
    Paul lowered his head, lest his expression betray the lie. Safe! Lichna was ashes in a secret grave.
    "That's good then," Otheym said, taking Paul's lowered head for a nod of agreement. "One good thing among the evils, Usul. I don't like the world we're making, you know that? It was better when we were alone in the desert with only the Harkonnens for enemy." 
    "There's but a thin line between many an enemy and many a friend," Bijaz said. "Where that line stops, there's no beginning and no end. Let's end it, my friends." He moved to Paul's side, jittered from one foot to the other.
    "What's now-sense?" Paul asked, dragging out these moments, goading the dwarf.
    "Now!" Bijaz said, trembling. "Now! Now!" He tugged at Paul's robe. "Let us go now!"
    "His mouth rattles, but there's no harm in him," Otheym said, affection in his voice, the one good eye staring at Bijaz.
    "Even a rattle can signal departure," Bijaz said. "And so can tears. Let's be gone while there's time to begin." 
    "Bijaz, what do you fear?" Paul asked.
    "I fear the spirit seeking me now," Bijaz muttered. Perspiration stood out on his forehead. His cheeks twitched. "I fear the one who thinks not and will have no body except mine -- and that one gone back into itself! I fear the things I see and the things I do not see." 
    This dwarf does possess the power of prescience, Paul thought. Bijaz shared the terrifying oracle. Did he share the oracle's fate, as well? How potent was the dwarf's power? Did he have the little prescience of those who dabbled in the Dune Tarot? Or was it something greater? How much had he seen?
    "Best you go," Dhuri said. "Bijaz is right." 
    "Every minute we linger," Bijaz said, "prolongs . . . prolongs the present!"
    Every minute I linger defers my guilt, Paul thought. A worm's poisonous breath, its teeth dripping dust, had washed over him. It had happened long ago, but he inhaled the memory of it now -- spice and bitterness. He could sense his own worm waiting -- "the urn of the desert."
    "These are troubled times," he said, addressing himself to Otheym's judgment of their world.
    "Fremen know what to do in time of trouble," Dhuri said.
    Otheym contributed a shaky nod.
    Paul glanced at Dhuri. He'd not expected gratitude, would have been burdened by it more than he could bear, but Otheym's bitterness and the passionate resentment he saw in Dhuri's eyes shook his resolve. Was anything worth this price?
    "Delay serves no purpose," Dhuri said. 
    "Do what you must, Usul." Otheym wheezed.
    Paul sighed. The words of the vision had been spoken. "There'll be an accounting," he said, to complete it. Turning, he strode from the room, heard Bijaz foot-slapping behind.
    "Bygones, bygones," Bijaz muttered as they went. "Let bygones fall where they may. This has been a dirty day."

= = = = = =

The convoluted wording of legalisms grew up around the necessity to hide from ourselves the violence we intend toward each other. Between depriving a man of one hour from his life and depriving him of his life there exists only a difference of degree. You have done violence to him, consumed his energy. Elaborate euphemisms may conceal your intent to kill, but behind any use of power over another the ultimate assumption remains: "I feed on your energy."
-Addenda to Orders in Council The Emperor Paul Muad'dib

    First Moon stood high over the city as Paul, his shield activated and shimmering around him, emerged from the cul-de-sac. A wind off the massif whirled sand and dust down the narrow street, causing Bijaz to blink and shield his eyes.
    "We must hurry," the dwarf muttered. "Hurry! Hurry!" 
    "You sense danger?" Paul asked, probing. 
    "I know danger!"
    An abrupt sense of peril very near was followed almost immediately by a figure joining them out of a doorway. 
    Bijaz crouched and whimpered.
    It was only Stilgar moving like a war machine, head thrust forward, feet striking the street solidly.
    Swiftly, Paul explained the value of the dwarf, handed Bijaz over to Stilgar. The pace of the vision moved here with great rapidity. Stilgar sped away with Bijaz. Security Guards enveloped Paul. Orders were given to send men down the street toward the house beyond Otheym's. The men hurried to obey, shadows among shadows. 
    More sacrifices, Paul thought.
    "We want live prisoners," one of the guard officers hissed.
    The sound was a vision-echo in Paul's ears. It went with solid precision here -- vision/reality, tick for tick. Ornithopters drifted down across the moon. 
    The night was full of Imperial troopers attacking.
    A soft hiss grew out of the other sounds, climbed to a roar while they still heard the sibilance. It picked up a terra-cotta glow that hid the stars, engulfed the moon.
    Paul, knowing that sound and glow from the earliest nightmare glimpses of his vision, felt an odd sense of fulfillment. It went the way it must. "Stone burner!" someone screamed.
    "Stone burner!" The cry was all around him. 
    "Stone burner . . . stone burner . . ."
    Because it was required of him, Paul threw a protective arm across his face, dove for the low lip of a curb. It already was too late, of course.
    Where Otheym's house had been there stood now a pillar of fire, a blinding jet roaring at the heavens. It gave off a dirty brilliance which threw into sharp relief every ballet movement of the fighting and fleeing men, the tipping retreat of ornithopters.
    For every member of this frantic throng it was too late.
    The ground grew hot beneath Paul. He heard the sound of running stop. Men threw themselves down all around him, every one of them aware that there was no point in running. The first damage had been done; and now they must wait out the extent of the stone burner's potency. The things's radiation, which no man could outrun, already had penetrated their flesh. The peculiar result of stone-burner radiation already was at work in them. What else this weapon might do now lay in the planning of the men who had used it, the men who had defied the Great Convention to use it.
    "God's . . . a stone burner," someone whimpered. "I . . . don't . . . want . . . to . . . be . . . blind."
    "Who does?" The harsh voice of a trooper far down the street
    "The Tleilaxu will sell many eyes here," someone near Paul growled. "Now, shut up and wait!" 
    They waited.
    Paul remained silent, thinking what this weapon implied. Too much fuel in it and it'd cut its way into the planet's core. Dune's molten level lay deep, but the more dangerous for that. Such pressures released and out of control might split a planet, scattering lifeless bits and pieces through space.
    "I think it's dying down a bit," someone said.
    "It's just digging deeper," Paul cautioned. "Stay put, all of you. Stilgar will be sending help." 
    "Stilgar got away?" 
    "Stilgar got away." 
    "The ground's hot," someone complained.
    "They dared use atomics!" a trooper near Paul protested.
    "The sound's diminishing," someone down the street said.
    Paul ignored the words, concentrated on his fingertips against the street. He could feel the rolling-rumbling of the thing -- deep . . . deep . . . 
    "My eyes!" someone cried. "I can't see!"
    Someone closer to it than I was, Paul thought. He still could see to the end of the cul-de-sac when he lifted his head, although there was a mistiness across the scene. A red-yellow glow filled the area where Otheym's house and its neighbor had been. Pieces of adjoining buildings made dark patterns as they crumbled into the glowing pit.
    Paul climbed to his feet. He felt the stone burner die, silence beneath him. His body was wet with perspiration against the stillsuit's slickness -- too much for the suit to accommodate. The air he drew into his lungs carried the heat and sulfur stench of the burner.
    As he looked at the troopers beginning to stand up around him, the mist on Paul's eyes faded into darkness. He summoned up his oracular vision of these moments, then, turned and strode along the track that Time had carved for him, fitting himself into the vision so tightly that it could not escape. He felt himself grow aware of this place as a multitudinous possession, reality welded to prediction.
    Moans and groans of his troopers arose all around him as the men realized their blindness.
    "Hold fast!" Paul shouted. "Help is coming!" And, as the complaints persisted, he said: "This is Muad'dib! I command you to hold fast! Help comes!" 
    Silence.
    Then, true to his vision, a nearby guardsman said: "Is it truly the Emperor? Which of you can see? Tell me." 
    "None of us has eyes," Paul said. "They have taken my eyes, as well, but not my vision. I can see you standing there, a dirty wall within touching distance on your left. Now wait bravely. Stilgar comes with our friends." 
    The thwock-thwock of many 'thopters grew louder all around. There was the sound of hurrying feet. Paul watched his friends come, matching their sounds to his oracular vision.
    "Stilgar!" Paul shouted, waving an arm. "Over here!" 
    "Thanks to Shai-hulud," Stilgar cried, running up to Paul. "You're not . . . " In the sudden silence, Paul's vision showed him Stilgar staring with an expression of agony at the ruined eyes of his friend and Emperor. "Oh, m' Lord," Stilgar groaned. "Usul . . . Usul . . . Usul . . . " 
    "What of the stone burner?" one of the newcomers shouted.
    "It's ended," Paul said, raising his voice. He gestured. "Get up there now and rescue the ones who were closest to it. Put up barriers. Lively now!" He turned back to Stilgar.
    "Do you see, m'Lord?" Stilgar asked, wonder in his tone. "How can you see?"
    For answer, Paul put a finger out to touch Stilgar's cheek above the stillsuit mouthcap, felt tears. "You need give no moisture to me, old friend," Paul said. "I am not dead." 
    "But your eyes!"
    "They've blinded my body, but not my vision," Paul said. "Ah, Stil, I live in an apocalyptic dream. My steps fit into it so precisely that I fear most of all I will grow bored reliving the thing so exactly." 
    "Usul, I don't, I don't . . ."
    "Don't try to understand it. Accept it. I am in the world beyond this world here. For me, they are the same. I need no hand to guide me. I see every movement all around me. I see every expression of your face. I have no eyes, yet I see."
    Stilgar shook his head sharply. "Sire, we must conceal your affliction from --" 
    "We hide it from no man," Paul said. 
    "But the law . . . "
    "We live by the Atreides Law now, Stil. The Fremen Law that the blind should be abandoned in the desert applies only to the blind. I am not blind. I live in the cycle of being where the war of good and evil has its arena. We are at a turning point in the succession of ages and we have our parts to play."
    In a sudden stillness, Paul heard one of the wounded being led past him. "It was terrible," the man groaned, "a great fury of fire."
    "None of these men shall be taken into the desert," Paul said. "You hear me, Stil?" 
    "I hear you, m'Lord." 
    "They are to be fitted with new eyes at my expense." 
    "It will be done, m'Lord."
    Paul, hearing the awe grow in Stilgar's voice, said: "I will be at the Command 'thopter. Take charge here." 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    Paul stepped around Stilgar, strode down the street. His vision told him every movement, every irregularity beneath his feet, every face he encountered. He gave orders as he moved, pointing to men of his personal entourage, calling out names, summoning to himself the ones who represented the intimate apparatus of government. He could feel the terror grow behind him, the fearful whispers. 
    "His eyes!" 
    "But he looked right at you, called you by name!" 
    At the Command 'thopter, he deactivated his personal shield, reached into the machine and took the microphone from the hand of a startled communications officer, issued a swift string of orders, thrust the microphone back into the officer's hand. Turning, Paul summoned a weapons specialist, one of the eager and brilliant new breed who remembered sietch life only dimly.
    "They used a stone burner," Paul said.
    After the briefest pause, the man said: "So I was told, Sire." 
    "You know what that means, of course."
    "The fuel could only have been atomic." 
    Paul nodded, thinking of how this man's mind must be racing. Atomics. The Great Convention prohibited such weapons. Discovery of the perpetrator would bring down the combined retributive assault of the Great Houses. Old feuds would be forgotten, discarded in the face of this threat and the ancient fears it aroused.
    "It cannot have been manufactured without leaving some traces," Paul said. "You will assemble the proper equipment and search out the place where the stone burner was made."
    "At once, Sire." With one last fearful glance, the man sped away.
    "M'Lord," the communications officer ventured from behind him. "Your eyes . . . "
    Paul turned, reached into the 'thopter, returned the command set to his personal band. "Call Chani," he ordered. "Tell her . . . tell her I am alive and will be with her soon."
    Now the forces gather, Paul thought. And he noted how strong was the smell of fear in the perspiration all around.

= = = = = =

He has gone from Alia, 
The womb of heaven! 
Holy, holy, holy! 
Fire-sand leagues 
Confront our Lord. 
He can see 
Without eyes!
A demon upon him! 
Holy, holy, holy 
Equation:
He solved for 
Martyrdom!
-The Moon Falls Down Songs of Muad'dib

    After seven days of radiating fevered activity, the Keep took on an unnatural quiet. On this morning, there were people about, but they spoke in whispers, heads close together, and they walked softly. Some scurried with an oddly furtive gait. The sight of a guard detail coming in from the forecourt drew questioning looks and frowns at the noise which the newcomers brought with their tramping about and stacking of weapons. The newcomers caught the mood of the interior, though, and began moving in that furtive way.
    Talk of the stone burner still floated around: "He said the fire had blue-green in it and a smell out of hell." 
    "Elpa is a fool! He says he'll commit suicide rather than take Tleilaxu eyes." 
    "I don't like talk of eyes." 
    "Muad'dib passed me and called me by name!" 
    "How does He see without eyes?"
    "People are leaving, had you heard? There's great fear. The Naibs say they'll go to Sietch Makab for a Grand Council." 
    "What've they done with the Panegyrist?" 
    "I saw them take him into the chamber where the Naibs are meeting. Imagine Korba a prisoner!"
    Chani had arisen early, awakened by a stillness in the Keep. Awakening, she'd found Paul sitting beside her, his eyeless sockets aimed at some formless place beyond the far wall of their bedchamber. What the stone burner had done with its peculiar affinity for eye tissue, all that ruined flesh had been removed. Injections and unguents had saved the stronger flesh around the sockets, but she felt that the radiation had gone deeper.
    Ravenous hunger seized her as she sat up. She fed on the food kept by the bedside -- spicebread, a heavy cheese.
    Paul gestured at the food. "Beloved, there was no way to spare you this. Believe me."
    Chani stilled a fit of trembling when he aimed those empty sockets at her. She'd given up asking him to explain. He spoke so oddly: "I was baptized in sand and it cost me the knack of believing. Who trades in faiths anymore? Who'll buy? Who'll sell?"
    What could he mean by such words?
    He refused even to consider Tleilaxu eyes, although he bought them with a lavish hand for the men who'd shared his affliction.
    Hunger satisfied, Chani slipped from bed, glanced back at Paul, noted his tiredness. Grim lines framed his mouth. The dark hair stood up, mussed from a sleep that hadn't healed. He appeared so saturnine and remote. The back and forth of waking and sleeping did nothing to change this. She forced herself to turn away, whispered: "My love . . . my love . . . "
    He leaned over, pulled her back into the bed, kissed her cheeks. "Soon we'll go back to our desert," he whispered. "Only a few things remain to be done here." 
    She trembled at the finality in his voice.
    He tightened his arms around her, murmured: "Don't fear me, my Sihaya. Forget mystery and accept love. There's no mystery about love. It comes from life. Can't you feel that?" 
    "Yes."
    She put a palm against his chest, counting his heartbeats. His love cried out to the Fremen spirit in her -- torrential, outpouring, savage. A magnetic power enveloped her.
    "I promise you a thing, beloved," he said. "A child of ours will rule such an empire that mine will fade in comparison. Such achievements of living and art and sublime --"
    "We're here now!" she protested, fighting a dry sob. "And . . . I feel we have so little . . . time." 
    "We have eternity, beloved." 
    "You may have eternity. I have only now." 
    "But this is eternity." He stroked her forehead.
    She pressed against him, lips on his neck. The pressure agitated the life in her womb. She felt it stir.
    Paul felt it, too. He put a hand on her abdomen, said: "Ahh, little ruler of the universe, wait your time. This moment is mine."
    She wondered then why he always spoke of the life within her as singular. Hadn't the medics told him? She searched back in her own memory, curious that the subject had never arisen between them. Surely, he must know she carried twins. She hesitated on the point of raising this question. He must know. He knew everything. He knew all the things that were herself. His hands, his mouth -- all of him knew her.
    Presently, she said: "Yes, love. This is forever . . . this is real." And she closed her eyes tightly lest sight of his dark sockets stretch her soul from paradise to hell. No matter the rihani magic in which he'd enciphered their lives, his flesh remained real, his caresses could not be denied.
    When they arose to dress for the day, she said: "If the people only knew your love . . ."
    But his mood had changed. "You can't build politics on love," he said. "People aren't concerned with love; it's too disordered. They prefer despotism. Too much freedom breeds chaos. We can't have that, can we? And how do you make despotism lovable?"
    "You're not a despot!" she protested, tying her scarf. "Your laws are just."
    "Ahh, laws," he said. He crossed to the window, pulled back the draperies as though he could look out. "What's law? Control? Law filters chaos and what drips through? Serenity? Law -- our highest ideal and our basest nature. Don't look too closely at the law. Do, and you'll find the rationalized interpretations, the legal casuistry, the precedents of convenience. You'll find the serenity, which is just another word for death."
    Chani's mouth drew into a tight line. She couldn't deny his wisdom and sagacity, but these moods frightened her. He turned upon himself and she sensed internal wars. It was as though he took the Fremen maxim, "Never to forgive -- never to forget," and whipped his own flesh with it.
    She crossed to his side, stared past him at an angle. The growing heat of the day had begun pulling the north wind out of these protected latitudes. The wind painted a false sky full of ochre plumes and sheets of crystal, strange designs in rushing gold and red. High and cold, the wind broke against the Shield Wall with fountains of dust.
    Paul felt Chani's warmth beside him. Momentarily, he lowered a curtain of forgetfulness across his vision. He might just be standing here with his eyes closed. Time refused to stand still for him, though. He inhaled darkness -- starless, tearless. His affliction dissolved substance until all that remained was astonishment at the way sounds condensed his universe. Everything around him leaned on his lonely sense of hearing, falling back only when he touched objects: the drapery, Chani's hand . . . He caught himself listening for Chani's breaths.
    Where was the insecurity of things that were only probable? he asked himself. His mind carried such a burden of mutilated memories. For every instant of reality there existed countless projections, things fated never to be. An invisible self within him remembered the false pasts, their burden threatening at times to overwhelm the present.
    Chani leaned against his arm.
    He felt his body through her touch: dead flesh carried by time eddies. He reeked of memories that had glimpsed eternity. To see eternity was to be exposed to eternity's whims, oppressed by endless dimensions. The oracle's false immortality demanded retribution: Past and Future became simultaneous.
    Once more, the vision arose from its black pit, locked onto him. It was his eyes. It moved his muscles. It guided him into the next moment, the next hour, the next day . . . until he felt himself to be always there!
    "It's time we were going," Chani said. "The Council . . ." 
    "Alia will be there to stand in my place." 
    "Does she know what to do?" 
    "She knows." 
    Alia's day began with a guard squadron swarming into the parade yard below her quarters. She stared down at a scene of frantic confusion, clamorous and intimidating babble. The scene became intelligible only when she recognized the prisoner they'd brought: Korba, the Panegyrist.
    She made her morning toilet, moving occasionally to the window, keeping watch on the progress of impatience down there. Her gaze kept straying to Korba. She tried to remember him as the rough and bearded commander of the third wave in the battle of Arrakeen. It was impossible. Korba had become an immaculate fop dressed now in a Parato silk robe of exquisite cut. It lay open to the waist, revealing a beautifully laundered ruff and embroidered undercoat set with green gems. A purple belt gathered the waist. The sleeves poking through the robe's armhole slits had been tailored into rivulet ridges of dark green and black velvet.
    A few Naibs had come out to observe the treatment accorded a fellow Fremen. They'd brought on the clamor, exciting Korba to protest his innocence. Alia moved her gaze across the Fremen faces, trying to recapture memories of the original men. The present blotted out the past. They'd all become hedonists, samplers of pleasures most men couldn't even imagine.
    Their uneasy glances, she saw, strayed often to the doorway into the chamber where they would meet. They were thinking of Muad'dib's blind-sight, a new manifestation of mysterious powers. By their law, a blind man should be abandoned in the desert, his water given up to Shai-hulud. But eyeless Muad'dib saw them. They disliked buildings, too, and felt vulnerable in space built above the ground. Give them a proper cave cut from rock, then they could relax -- but not here, not with this new Muad'dib waiting inside.
    As she turned to go down to the meeting, she saw the letter where she'd left it on a table by the door: the latest message from their mother. Despite the special reverence held for Caladan as the place of Paul's birth, the Lady Jessica had emphasized her refusal to make her planet a stop on the hajj.
    "No doubt my son is an epochal figure of history," she'd written, "but I cannot see this as an excuse for submitting to a rabble invasion."
    Alia touched the letter, experienced an odd sensation of mutual contact. This paper had been in her mother's hands. Such an archaic device, the letter -- but personal in a way no recording could achieve. Written in the Atreides Battle Tongue, it represented an almost invulnerable privacy of communication.
    Thinking of her mother afflicted Alia with the usual inward blurring. The spice change that had mixed the psyches of mother and daughter forced her at times to think of Paul as a son to whom she had given birth. The capsule-complex of oneness could present her own father as a lover. Ghost shadows cavorted in her mind, people of possibility.
    Alia reviewed the letter as she walked down the ramp to the antechamber where her guard amazons waited.
    "You produce a deadly paradox," Jessica had written. "Government cannot be religious and self-assertive at the same time. Religious experience needs a spontaneity which laws inevitably suppress. And you cannot govern without laws. Your laws eventually must replace morality, replace conscience, replace even the religion by which you think to govern. Sacred ritual must spring from praise and holy yearnings which hammer out a significant morality. Government, on the other hand, is a cultural organism particularly attractive to doubts, questions and contentions. I see the day coming when ceremony must take the place of faith and symbolism replaces morality." 
    The smell of spice-coffee greeted Alia in the antechamber. Four guard amazons in green watchrobes came to attention as she entered. They fell into step behind her, striding firmly in the bravado of their youth, eyes alert for trouble. They had zealot faces untouched by awe. They radiated that special Fremen quality of violence: they could kill casually with no sense of guilt.
    In this, I am different, Alia thought. The Atreides name has enough dirt on it without that.
    Word preceded her. A waiting page darted off as she entered the lower hall, running to summon the full guard detail. The hall stretched out windowless and gloomy, illuminated only by a few subdued glowglobes. Abruptly, the doors to the parade yard opened wide at the far end to admit a glaring shaft of daylight. The guard with Korba in their midst wavered into view from the outside with the light behind them.
    "Where is Stilgar?" Alia demanded. 
    "Already inside," one of her amazons said.
    Alia led the way into the chamber. It was one of the Keep's more pretentious meeting places. A high balcony with rows of soft seats occupied one side. Across from the balcony, orange draperies had been pulled back from tall windows. Bright sunlight poured through from an open space with a garden and a fountain. At the near end of the chamber on her right stood a dais with a single massive chair.
    Moving to the chair, Alia glanced back and up, saw the gallery filled with Naibs.
    Household guardsmen packed the open space beneath the gallery, Stilgar moving among them with a quiet word here, a command there. He gave no sign that he'd seen Alia enter,
    Korba was brought in, seated at a low table with cushions beside it on the chamber floor below the dais. Despite his finery, the Panegyrist gave the appearance now of a surly, sleepy old man huddled up in his robes as against the outer cold. Two guardsmen took up positions behind him.
    Stilgar approached the dais as Alia seated herself. 
    "Where is Muad'dib?" he asked.
    "My brother has delegated me to preside as Reverend Mother," Alia said.
    Hearing this, the Naibs in the gallery began raising their voices in protest.
    "Silence!" Alia commanded. In the abrupt quiet, she said: "Is it not Fremen law that a Reverend Mother presides when life and death are at issue?"
    As the gravity of her statement penetrated, stillness came over the Naibs, but Alia marked angry stares across the rows of faces. She named them in her mind for discussion in Council -- Hobars, Rajifiri, Tasmin, Saajid, Umbu, Legg . . . The names carried pieces of Dune in them: Umbu Sietch, Tasmin Sink, Hobars Gap . . .
    She turned her attention to Korba.
    Observing her attention, Korba lifted his chin, said: "I protest my innocence." 
    "Stilgar, read the charges," Alia said.
    Stilgar produced a brown spicepaper scroll, stepped forward. He began reading, a solemn flourish in his voice as though to hidden rhythms. He gave the words an incisive quality, clear and full of probity:
    " . . . that you did conspire with traitors to accomplish the destruction of our Lord and Emperor; that you did meet in vile secrecy with diverse enemies of the realm; that you . . . "
    Korba kept shaking his head with a look of pained anger.
    Alia listened broodingly, chin planted on her left fist, head cocked to that side, the other arm extended along the chair arm. Bits of the formal procedure began dropping out of her awareness, screened by her own feelings of disquiet.
    " . . . venerable tradition . . . support of the legions and all Fremen everywhere . . . violence met with violence according to the Law . . . majesty of the Imperial Person . . . forfeit all rights to . . ."
    It was nonsense, she thought. Nonsense! All of it -- nonsense . . . nonsense . . . nonsense . . . 
    Stilgar finished: "Thus the issue is brought to judgment."
    In the immediate silence, Korba rocked forward, hands gripping his knees, veined neck stretched as though he were preparing to leap. His tongue flicked between his teeth as he spoke.
    "Not by word or deed have I been traitor to my Fremen vows! I demand to confront my accuser!" 
    A simple enough protest, Alia thought.
    And she saw that it had produced a considerable effect on the Naibs. They knew Korba. He was one of them. To become a Naib, he'd proved his Fremen courage and caution. Not brilliant, Korba, but reliable. Not one to lead a Jihad, perhaps, but a good choice as supply officer. Not a crusader, but one who cherished the old Fremen virtues: The Tribe is paramount.
    Otheym's bitter words as Paul had recited them swept through Alia's mind. She scanned the gallery. Any of those men might see himself in Korba's place -- some for good reason. But an innocent Naib was as dangerous as a guilty one here.
    Korba felt it, too. "Who accuses me?" he demanded. "I have a Fremen right to confront my accuser." 
    "Perhaps you accuse yourself," Alia said.
    Before he could mask it, mystical terror lay briefly on Korba's face. It was there for anyone to read: With her powers, Alia had but to accuse him herself, saying she brought the evidence from the shadow region, the alam al-mythal.
    "Our enemies have Fremen allies," Alia pressed. "Water traps have been destroyed, qanats blasted, plantings poisoned and storage basins plundered . . ." 
    "And now -- they've stolen a worm from the desert, taken it to another world!"
    The voice of this intrusion was known to all of them -- Muad'dib. Paul came through the doorway from the hall, pressed through the guard ranks and crossed to Alia's side. Chani, accompanying him, remained on the sidelines.
    "M'Lord," Stilgar said, refusing to look at Paul's face.
    Paul aimed his empty sockets at the gallery, then down to Korba. "What, Korba -- no words of praise?"
    Muttering could be heard in the gallery. It grew louder, isolated words and phrases audible: " . . . law for the blind . . . Fremen way . . . in the desert . . . who breaks . . ." 
    "Who says I'm blind?" Paul demanded. He faced the gallery. "You, Rajifiri? I see you're wearing gold today, and that blue shirt beneath it which still has dust on it from the streets. You always were untidy." 
    Rajifiri made a warding gesture, three fingers against evil.
    "Point those fingers at yourself!" Paul shouted. "We know where the evil is!" He turned back to Korba. "There's guilt on your face, Korba."
    "Not my guilt! I may've associated with the guilty, but no . . . " He broke off, shot a frightened look at the gallery.
    Taking her cue from Paul, Alia arose, stepped down to the floor of the chamber, advanced to the edge of Korba's table. From a range of less than a meter, she stared down at him, silent and intimidating.
    Korba cowered under the burden of eyes. He fidgeted, shot anxious glances at the gallery.
    "Whose eyes do you seek up there?" Paul asked. 
    "You cannot see!" Korba blurted.
    Paul put down a momentary feeling of pity for Korba. The man lay trapped in the vision's snare as securely as any of those present. He played a part, no more.
    "I don't need eyes to see you," Paul said. And he began describing Korba, every movement, every twitch, every alarmed and pleading look at the gallery. 
    Desperation grew in Korba.
    Watching him, Alia saw he might break any second. Someone in the gallery must realize how near he was to breaking, she thought. Who? She studied the faces of the Naibs, noting small betrayals in the masked faces . . . angers, fears, uncertainties . . . guilts. 
    Paul fell silent.
    Korba mustered a pitiful air of pomposity to plead: "Who accuses me?" 
    "Otheym accuses you," Alia said. 
    "But Otheym's dead!" Korba protested.
    "How did you know that?" Paul asked. "Through your spy system? Oh, yes! We know about your spies and couriers. We know who brought the stone burner here from Tarahell." 
    "It was for the defense of the Qizarate!" Korba blurted. 
    "Is that how it got into traitorous hands?" Paul asked.
    "It was stolen and we . . ." Korba fell silent, swallowed. His gaze darted left and right. "Everyone knows I've been the voice of love for Muad'dib." He stared at the gallery. "How can a dead man accuse a Fremen?"
    "Otheym's voice isn't dead," Alia said. She stopped as Paul touched her arm.
    "Otheym sent us his voice," Paul said. "It gives the names, the acts of treachery, the meeting places and the times. Do you miss certain faces in the Council of Naibs, Korba? Where are Merkur and Fash? Keke the Lame isn't with us today. And Takim, where is he?" 
    Korba shook his head from side to side.
    "They've fled Arrakis with the stolen worm," Paul said. "Even if I freed you now, Korba, Shai-hulud would have your water for your part in this. Why don't I free you, Korba? Think of all those men whose eyes were taken, the men who cannot see as I see. They have families and friends, Korba. Where could you hide from them?" 
    "It was an accident," Korba pleaded. "Anyway, they're getting Tleilaxu . . . " Again, he subsided.
    "Who knows what bondage goes with metal eyes?" Paul asked.
    The Naibs in their gallery began exchanging whispered comments, speaking behind raised hands. They gazed coldly at Korba now.
    "Defense of the Qizarate," Paul murmured, returning to Korba's plea. "A device which either destroys a planet or produces J-rays to blind those too near it. Which effect, Korba, did you conceive as a defense? Does the Qizarate rely on stopping the eyes of all observers?" 
    "It was a curiosity, m'Lord," Korba pleaded. "We knew the Old Law said that only Families could possess atomics, but the Qizarate obeyed . . . obeyed . . . " 
    "Obeyed you," Paul said. "A curiosity, indeed." 
    "Even if it's only the voice of my accuser, you must face me with it!" Korba said. "A Fremen has rights." 
    "He speaks truth, Sire," Stilgar said. 
    Alia glanced sharply at Stilgar.
    "The law is the law," Stilgar said, sensing Alia's protest. He began quoting Fremen Law, interspersing his own comments on how the Law pertained.
    Alia experienced the odd sensation she was hearing Stilgar's words before he spoke them. How could he be this credulous? Stilgar had never appeared more official and conservative, more intent on adhering to the Dune Code. His chin was outthrust, aggressive. His mouth chopped. Was there really nothing in him but this outrageous pomposity?
    "Korba is a Fremen and must be judged by Fremen Law," Stilgar concluded.
    Alia turned away, looked out at the day shadows dropping down the wall across from the garden. She felt drained by frustration. They'd dragged this thing along well into midmorning. Now, what? Korba had relaxed. The Panegyrist's manner said he'd suffered an unjust attack, that everything he'd done had been for love of Muad'dib. She glanced at Korba, surprised a look of sly self-importance sliding across his face.
    He might almost have received a message, she thought. He acted the part of a man who'd heard friends shout: "Hold fast! Help is on its way!"
    For an instant, they'd held this thing in their hands -- the information out of the dwarf, the clues that others were in the plot, the names of informants. But the critical moment had flown. Stilgar? Surely not Stilgar. She turned, stared at the old Fremen. 
    Stilgar met her gaze without flinching.
    "Thank you, Stil," Paul said, "for reminding us of the Law."
    Stilgar inclined his head. He moved close, shaped silent words in a way he knew both Paul and Alia could read. I'll wring him dry and then take care of the matter. 
    Paul nodded, signaled the guardsmen behind Korba.
    "Remove Korba to a maximum security cell," Paul said. "No visitors except counsel. As counsel, I appoint Stilgar."
    "Let me choose my own counsel!" Korba shouted.
    Paul whirled. "You deny the fairness and judgment of Stilgar?" 
    "Oh, no, m'Lord, but . . . " 
    "Take him away!" Paul barked.
    The guardsmen lifted Korba off the cushions, herded him out.
    With new mutterings, the Naibs began quitting their gallery. Attendants came from beneath the gallery, crossed to the windows and drew the orange draperies. Orange gloom took over the chamber. 
    "Paul," Alia said.
    "When we precipitate violence," Paul said, "it'll be when we have full control of it. Thank you, Stil; you played your part well. Alia, I'm certain, has identified the Naibs who were with him. They couldn't help giving themselves away." 
    "You cooked this up between you?" Alia demanded.
    "Had I ordered Korba slain out of hand, the Naibs would have understood," Paul said. "But this formal procedure without strict adherence to Fremen Law -- they felt their own rights threatened. Which Naibs were with him, Alia?"
    "Rajifiri for certain," she said, voice low. "And Saajid, but . . . "
    "Give Stilgar the complete list," Paul said.
    Alia swallowed in a dry throat, sharing the general fear of Paul in this moment. She knew how he moved among them without eyes, but the delicacy of it daunted her. To see their forms in the air of his vision! She sensed her person shimmering for him in a sidereal time whose accord with reality depended entirely on his words and actions. He held them all in the palm of his vision!
    "It's past time for your morning audience, Sire," Stilgar said. "Many people -- curious . . . afraid . . ." 
    "Are you afraid, Stil?" 
    It was barely a whisper: "Yes."
    "You're my friend and have nothing to fear from me," Paul said.
    Stilgar swallowed. "Yes, m'Lord."
    "Alia, take the morning audience," Paul said. "Stilgar, give the signal." 
    Stilgar obeyed.
    A flurry of movement erupted at the great doors. A crowd was pressed back from the shadowy room to permit entrance of officials. Many things began happening all at once: the household guard elbowing and shoving back the press of Supplicants, garishly robed Pleaders trying to break through, shouts, curses. Pleaders waved the papers of their calling. The Clerk of the Assemblage strode ahead of them through the opening cleared by the guard. He carried the List of Preferences, those who'd be permitted to approach the Throne. The Clerk, a wiry Fremen named Tecrube, carried himself with weary cynicism, flaunting his shaven head, clumped whiskers.
    Alia moved to intercept him, giving Paul time to slip away with Chani through the private passage behind the dais. She experienced a momentary distrust of Tecrube at the prying curiosity in the stare he sent after Paul.
    "I speak for my brother today," she said. "Have the Supplicants approach one at a time." 
    "Yes, m'Lady." He turned to arrange his throng.
    "I can remember a time when you wouldn't have mistaken your brother's purpose here," Stilgar said.
    "I was distracted," she said. "There's been a dramatic change in you, Stil. What is it?"
    Stilgar drew himself up, shocked. One changed, of course. But dramatically? This was a particular view of himself that he'd never encountered. Drama was a questionable thing. Imported entertainers of dubious loyalty and more dubious virtue were dramatic. Enemies of the Empire employed drama in their attempts to sway the fickle populace. Korba had slipped away from Fremen virtues to employ drama for the Qizarate. And he'd die for that.
    "You're being perverse," Stilgar said. "Do you distrust me?"
    The distress in his voice softened her expression, but not her tone. "You know I don't distrust you. I've always agreed with my brother that once matters were in Stilgar's hands we could safely forget them." 
    "Then why do you say I've . . . changed?" 
    "You're preparing to disobey my brother," she said. "I can read it in you. I only hope it doesn't destroy you both."
    The first of the Pleaders and Supplicants were approaching now. She turned away before Stilgar could respond. His face, though, was filled with the things she'd sensed in her mother's letter -- the replacement of morality and conscience with law.
    "You produce a deadly paradox."

= = = = = =

Tibana was an apologist for Socratic Christianity, probably a native of IV Anbus who lived between the eight and ninth centuries before Corrino, likely in the second reign of Dalamak. Of his writings, only a portion survives from which this fragment is taken: "The hearts of all men dwell in the same wilderness."
-from The Dunebuk of Irulan

    "You are Bijaz," the ghola said, entering the small chamber where the dwarf was held under guard. "I am called Hayt."
    A strong contingent of the household guard had come in with the ghola to take over the evening watch. Sand carried by the sunset wind had stung their cheeks while they crossed the outer yard, made them blink and hurry. They could be heard in the passage outside now exchanging the banter and ritual of their tasks.
    "You are not Hayt," the dwarf said. "You are Duncan Idaho. I was there when they put your dead flesh into the tank and I was there when they removed it, alive and ready for training."
    The ghola swallowed in a throat suddenly dry. The bright glowglobes of the chamber lost their yellowness in the room's green hangings. The light showed beads of perspiration on the dwarf's forehead. Bijaz seemed a creature of odd integrity, as though the purpose fashioned into him by the Tleilaxu were projected out through his skin. There was power beneath the dwarf's mask of cowardice and frivolity.
    "Muad'dib has charged me to question you to determine what it is the Tleilaxu intend you to do here," Hayt said.
    "Tleilaxu, Tleilaxu," the dwarf sang. "I am the Tleilaxu, you dolt! For that matter, so are you." 
    Hayt stared at the dwarf. Bijaz radiated a charismatic alertness that made the observer think of ancient idols.
    "You hear that guard outside?" Hayt asked. "If I gave them the order, they'd strangle you."
    "Hai! Hai!" Bijaz cried. "What a callous lout you've become. And you said you came seeking truth." 
    Hayt found he didn't like the look of secret repose beneath the dwarf's expression. "Perhaps I only seek the future," he said.
    "Well spoken," Bijaz said. "Now we know each other. When two thieves meet they need no introduction." 
    "So we're thieves," Hayt said. "What do we steal?" 
    "Not thieves, but dice," Bijaz said. "And you came here to read my spots. I, in turn, read yours. And lo! You have two faces!"
    "Did you really see me go into the Tleilaxu tanks?" Hayt asked, fighting an odd reluctance to ask that question.
    "Did I not say it?" Bijaz demanded. The dwarf bounced to his feet. "We had a terrific struggle with you. The flesh did not want to come back."
    Hayt felt suddenly that he existed in a dream controlled by some other mind, and that he might momentarily forget this to become lost in the convolutions of that mind.
    Bijaz tipped his head slyly to one side, walked all around the ghola, staring up at him. "Excitement kindles old patterns in you," Bijaz said. "You are the pursuer who doesn't want to find what he pursues."
    "You're a weapon aimed at Muad'dib," Hayt said, swiveling to follow the dwarf. "What is it you're to do?" 
    "Nothing!" Bijaz said, stopping. "I give you a common answer to a common question."
    "Then you were aimed at Alia," Hayt said. "Is she your target?"
    "They call her Hawt, the Fish Monster, on the out-worlds," Bijaz said. "How is it I hear your blood boiling when you speak of her?"
    "So they call her Hawt," the ghola said, studying Bijaz for any clue to his purpose. The dwarf made such odd responses.
    "She is the virgin-harlot," Bijaz said. "She is vulgar, witty, knowledgeable to a depth that terrifies, cruel when she is most kind, unthinking while she thinks, and when she seeks to build she is as destructive as a coriolis storm." 
    "So you came here to speak out against Alia," Hayt said.
    "Against her?" Bijaz sank to a cushion against the wall. "I came here to be captured by the magnetism of her physical beauty." He grinned, a saurian expression in the big-featured face.
    "To attack Alia is to attack her brother," Hayt said.
    "That is so clear it is difficult to see," Bijaz said. "In truth, Emperor and sister are one person back to back, one being half male and half female."
    "That is a thing we've heard said by the Fremen of the deep desert," Hayt said. "And those are the ones who've revived the blood sacrifice to Shai-hulud. How is it you repeat their nonsense?"
    "You dare say nonsense?" Bijaz demanded. "You, who are both man and mask? Ahh, but the dice cannot read their own spots. I forget this. And you are doubly confused because you serve the Atreides double-being. Your senses are not as close to the answer as your mind is."
    "Do you preach that false ritual about Muad'dib to your guards?" Hayt asked, his voice low. He felt his mind being tangled by the dwarf's words.
    "They preach to me!" Bijaz said. "And they pray. Why should they not? All of us should pray. Do we not live in the shadow of the most dangerous creation the universe has ever seen?" 
    "Dangerous creation . . ."
    "Their own mother refuses to live on the same planet with them!"
    "Why don't you answer me straight out?" Hayt demanded. "You know we have other ways of questioning you. We'll get our answers . . . one way or another." 
    "But I have answered you! Have I not said the myth is real? Am I the wind that carries death in its belly? No! I am words! Such words as the lightning which strikes from the sand in a dark sky. I have said: 'Blow out the lamp! Day is here!' And you keep saying: 'Give me a lamp so I can find the day.' "
    "You play a dangerous game with me," Hayt said. "Did you think I could not understand these Zensunni ideas? You leave tracks as clear as those of a bird in mud." 
    Bijaz began to giggle.
    "Why do you laugh?" Hayt demanded.
    "Because I have teeth and wish I had not," Bijaz managed between giggles. "Having no teeth, I could not gnash them."
    "And now I know your target," Hayt said. "You were aimed at me."
    "And I've hit it right on!" Bijaz said. "You made such a big target, how could I miss?" He nodded as though to himself. "Now I will sing to you." He began to hum, a keening, whining monotonous theme, repeated over and over.
    Hayt stiffened, experiencing odd pains that played up and down his spine. He stared at the face of the dwarf, seeing youthful eyes in an old face. The eyes were the center of a network of knobby white lines which ran to the hollows below his temples. Such a large head! Every feature focused on the pursed-up mouth from which that monotonous noise issued. The sound made Hayt think of ancient rituals, folk memories, old words and customs, half-forgotten meanings in lost mutterings. Something vital was happening here -- a bloody play of ideas across Time. Elder ideas lay tangled in the dwarfs singing. It was like a blazing light in the distance, coming nearer and nearer, illuminating life across a span of centuries. 
    "What are you doing to me?" Hayt gasped.
    "You are the instrument I was taught to play," Bijaz said. "I am playing you. Let me tell you the names of the other traitors among the Naibs. They are Bikouros and Cahueit. There is Djedida, who was secretary to Korba. There is Abumojandis, the aide to Bannerjee. Even now, one of them could be sinking a blade into your Muad'dib."
    Hayt shook his head from side to side. He found it too difficult to talk.
    "We are like brothers," Bijaz said, interrupting his monotonous hum once more. "We grew in the same tank: I first and then you."
    Hayt's metal eyes inflicted him with a sudden burning pain. Flickering red haze surrounded everything he saw. He felt he had been cut away from every immediate sense except the pain, and he experienced his surroundings through a thin separation like windblown gauze. All had become accident, the chance involvement of inanimate matter. His own will was no more than a subtle, shifting thing. It lived without breath and was intelligible only as an inward illumination.
    With a clarity born of desperation, he broke through the gauze curtain with the lonely sense of sight. His attention focused like a blazing light under Bijaz. Hayt felt that his eyes cut through layers of the dwarf, seeing the little man as a hired intellect, and beneath that, a creature imprisoned by hungers and cravings which lay huddled in the eyes -- layer after layer, until finally, there was only an entity-aspect being manipulated by symbols.
    "We are upon a battleground," Bijaz said. "You may speak of it."
    His voice freed by the command, Hayt said: "You cannot force me to slay Muad'dib."
    "I have heard the Bene Gesserit say," Bijaz said, "that there is nothing firm, nothing balanced, nothing durable in all the universe -- that nothing remains in its state, that each day, sometimes each hour, brings change." 
    Hayt shook his head dumbly from side to side.
    "You believed the silly Emperor was the prize we sought," Bijaz said. "How little you understand our masters, the Tleilaxu. The Guild and Bene Gesserit believe we produce artifacts. In reality, we produce tools and services. Anything can be a tool -- poverty, war. War is useful because it is effective in so many areas. It stimulates the metabolism. It enforces government. It diffuses genetic strains. It possesses a vitality such as nothing else in the universe. Only those who recognize the value of war and exercise it have any degree of self-determination."
    In an oddly placid voice, Hayt said: "Strange thoughts coming from you, almost enough to make me believe in a vengeful Providence. What restitution was exacted to create you? It would make a fascinating story, doubtless with an even more extraordinary epilogue." 
    "Magnificent!" Bijaz chortled. "You attack -- therefore you have willpower and exercise self-determination." 
    "You're trying to awaken violence in me," Hayt said in a panting voice.
    Bijaz denied this with a shake of the head. "Awaken, yes; violence, no. You are a disciple of awareness by training, so you have said. I have an awareness to awaken in you, Duncan Idaho." 
    "Hayt!"
    "Duncan Idaho. Killer extraordinary. Lover of many women. Swordsman soldier. Atreides field hand on the field of battle. Duncan Idaho." 
    "The past cannot be awakened." 
    "Cannot?" 
    "It has never been done!"
    "True, but our masters defy the idea that something cannot be done. Always, they seek the proper tool, the right application of effort, the services of the proper --" 
    "You hide your real purpose! You throw up a screen of words and they mean nothing!"
    "There is a Duncan Idaho in you," Bijaz said. "It will submit to emotion or to dispassionate examination, but submit it will. This awareness will rise through a screen of suppression and selection out of the dark past which dogs your footsteps. It goads you even now while it holds you back. There exists that being within you upon which awareness must focus and which you will obey." 
    "The Tleilaxu think I'm still their slave, but I --" 
    "Quiet, slave!" Bijaz said in that whining voice. 
    Hayt found himself frozen in silence.
    "Now we are down to bedrock," Bijaz said. "I know you feel it. And these are the power-words to manipulate you . . . I think they will have sufficient leverage." 
    Hayt felt the perspiration pouring down his cheeks, the trembling of his chest and arms, but he was powerless to move.
    "One day," Bijaz said, "the Emperor will come to you. He will say: 'She is gone.' The grief mask will occupy his face. He will give water to the dead, as they call their tears hereabouts. And you will say, using my voice: 'Master! Oh, Master!' "
    Hayt's jaw and throat ached with the locking of his muscles. He could only twist his head in a brief arc from side to side.
    "You will say, 'I carry a message from Bijaz.' " The dwarf grimaced. "Poor Bijaz, who has no mind . . . poor Bijaz, a drum stuffed with messages, an essence for others to use . . . pound on Bijaz and he produces a noise . . . " 
    Again, he grimaced. "You think me a hypocrite. Duncan Idaho! I am not! I can grieve, too. But the time has come to substitute swords for words." 
    A hiccup shook Hayt.
    Bijaz giggled, then: "Ah, thank you, Duncan, thank you. The demands of the body save us. As the Emperor carries the blood of the Harkonnens in his veins, he will do as we demand. He will turn into a spitting machine, a biter of words that ring with a lovely noise to our masters."
    Hayt blinked, thinking how the dwarf appeared like an alert little animal, a thing of spite and rare intelligence. Harkonnen blood in the Atreides?
    "You think of Beast Rabban, the vile Harkonnen, and you glare," Bijaz said. "You are like the Fremen in this. When words fail, the sword is always at hand, eh? You think of the torture inflicted upon your family by the Harkonnens. And, through his mother, your precious Paul is a Harkonnen! You would not find it difficult to slay a Harkonnen, now would you?"
    Bitter frustration coursed through the ghola. Was it anger? Why should this cause anger?
    "Ohhh," Bijaz said, and: "Ahhhh, hah! Click-click. There is more to the message. It is a trade the Tleilaxu offer your precious Paul Atreides. Our masters will restore his beloved. A sister to yourself -- another ghola." 
    Hayt felt suddenly that he existed in a universe occupied only by his own heartbeats.
    "A ghola," Bijaz said. "It will be the flesh of his beloved. She will bear his children. She will love only him. We can even improve on the original if he so desires. Did ever a man have greater opportunity to regain what he'd lost? It is a bargain he will leap to strike."
    Bijaz nodded, eyes drooping as though tiring. Then: "He will be tempted . . . and in his distraction, you will move close. In the instant, you will strike! Two gholas, not one! That is what our masters demand!" The dwarf cleared his throat, nodded once more, said: "Speak." 
    "I will not do it," Hayt said.
    "But Duncan Idaho would," Bijaz said. "It will be the moment of supreme vulnerability for this descendant of the Harkonnens. Do not forget this. You will suggest improvements to his beloved -- perhaps a deathless heart, gentler emotions. You will offer asylum as you move close to him -- a planet of his choice somewhere beyond the Imperium. Think of it! His beloved restored. No more need for tears, and a place of idyls to live out his years." 
    "A costly package," Hayt said, probing. "He'll ask the price."
    "Tell him he must renounce his godhead and discredit The Qizarate. He must discredit himself, his sister." 
    "Nothing more?" Hayt asked, sneering.
    "He must relinquish his CHOAM holdings, naturally." 
    "Naturally."
    "And if you're not yet close enough to strike, speak of how much the Tleilaxu admire what he has taught them about the possibilities of religion. Tell him the Tleilaxu have a department of religious engineering, shaping religions to particular needs." 
    "How very clever," Hayt said.
    "You think yourself free to sneer and disobey me," Bijaz said. He cocked his head slyly to one side. "Don't deny it . . ." 
    "They made you well, little animal," Hayt said.
    "And you as well," the dwarf said. "You will tell him to hurry. Flesh decays and her flesh must be preserved in a cryological tank."
    Hayt felt himself floundering, caught in a matrix of objects he could not recognize. The dwarf appeared so sure of himself! There had to be a flaw in the Tleilaxu logic. In making their ghola, they'd keyed him to the voice of Bijaz, but . . . But what? Logic/matrix/object . . . How easy it was to mistake clear reasoning for correct reasoning! Was Tleilaxu logic distorted?
    Bijaz smiled, listened as though to a hidden voice. "Now, you will forget," he said. "When the moment comes, you will remember. He will say: 'She is gone.' Duncan Idaho will awaken then." 
    The dwarf clapped his hands together.
    Hayt grunted, feeling that he had been interrupted in the middle of a thought . . . or perhaps in the middle of a sentence. What was it? Something about . . . targets? 
    "You think to confuse me and manipulate me," he said. 
    "How is that?" Bijaz asked.
    "I am your target and you can't deny it," Hayt said. 
    "I would not think of denying it." 
    "What is it you'd try to do with me?" 
    "A kindness," Bijaz said. "A simple kindness."

= = = = = =

The sequential nature of actual events is not illuminated with lengthy precision by the powers of prescience except under the most extraordinary circumstances. The oracle grasps incidents cut out of the historic chain. Eternity moves. It inflicts itself upon the oracle and the supplicant alike. Let Muad'dib's subjects doubt his majesty and his oracular visions. Let them deny his powers. Let them never doubt Eternity.
-The Dune Gospels

    Hayt watched Alia emerge from her temple and cross the plaza. Her guard was bunched close, fierce expressions on their faces to mask the lines molded by good living and complacency.
    A heliograph of 'thopter wings flashed in the bright afternoon sun above the temple, part of the Royal Guard with Muad'dib's fist-symbol on its fuselage.
    Hayt returned his gaze to Alia. She looked out of place here in the city, he thought. Her proper setting was the desert -- open, untrammeled space. An odd thing about her came back to him as he watched her approach: Alia appeared thoughtful only when she smiled. It was a trick of the eyes, he decided, recalling a cameo memory of her as she'd appeared at the reception for the Guild Ambassador: haughty against a background of music and brittle conversation among extravagant gowns and uniforms. And Alia had been wearing white, dazzling, a bright garment of chastity. He had looked down upon her from a window as she crossed an inner garden with its formal pond, its fluting fountains, fronds of pampas grass and a white belvedere.
    Entirely wrong . . . all wrong. She belonged in the desert.
    Hayt drew in a ragged breath. Alia had moved out of his view then as she did now. He waited, clenching and unclenching his fists. The interview with Bijaz had left him uneasy.
    He heard Alia's entourage pass outside the room where he waited. She went into the Family quarters.
    Now he tried to focus on the thing about her which troubled him. The way she'd walked across the plaza? Yes. She'd moved like a hunted creature fleeing some predator. He stepped out onto the connecting balcony, walked along it behind the plasmeld sunscreen, stopped while still in concealing shadows. Alia stood at the balustrade overlooking her temple.
    He looked where she was looking -- out over the city. He saw rectangles, blocks of color, creeping movements of life and sound. Structures gleamed, shimmered. Heat patterns spiraled off the rooftops. There was a boy across the way bouncing a ball in a cul-de-sac formed by a buttressed massif at a corner of the temple. Back and forth the ball went.
    Alia, too, watched the ball. She felt a compelling identity with that ball -- back and forth . . . back and forth. She sensed herself bouncing through corridors of Time.
    The potion of melange she'd drained just before leaving the temple was the largest she'd ever attempted -- a massive overdose. Even before beginning to take effect, it had terrified her.
    Why did I do it? she asked herself.
    "One made a choice between dangers." Was that it? This was the way to penetrate the fog spread over the future by that damnable Dune Tarot. A barrier existed. It must be breached. She had acted out of a necessity to see where it was her brother walked with his eyeless stride.
    The familiar melange fugue state began creeping into her awareness. She took a deep breath, experienced a brittle form of calm, poised and selfless.
    Possession of second sight has a tendency to make one a dangerous fatalist, she thought. Unfortunately, there existed no abstract leverage, no calculus of prescience. Visions of the future could not be manipulated as formulas. One had to enter them, risking life and sanity.
    A figure moved from the harsh shadows of the adjoining balcony. The ghola! In her heightened awareness, Alia saw him with intense clarity -- the dark, lively features dominated by those glistening metal eyes. He was a union of terrifying opposites, something put together in a shocking linear way. He was shadow and blazing light, a product of the process which had revived his dead flesh . . . and of something intensely pure . . . innocent. 
    He was innocence under siege!
    "Have you been there all along, Duncan?" she asked. 
    "So I'm to be Duncan," he said. "Why?" 
    "Don't question me," she said.
    And she thought, looking at him, that the Tleilaxu had left no corner of their ghola unfinished.
    "Only gods can safely risk perfection," she said. "It's a dangerous thing for a man."
    "Duncan died," he said, wishing she would not call him that. "I am Hayt."
    She studied his artificial eyes, wondering what they saw. Observed closely, they betrayed tiny black pockmarks, little wells of darkness in the glittering metal. Facets! The universe shimmered around her and lurched. She steadied herself with a hand on the sun-warmed surface of the balustrade. Ahhh, the melange moved swiftly.
    "Are you ill?" Hayt asked. He moved closer, the steely eyes opened wide, staring.
    Who spoke? she wondered. Was it Duncan Idaho? Was it the mentat-ghola or the Zensunni philosopher? Or was it a Tleilaxu pawn more dangerous than any Guild Steersman? Her brother knew.
    Again, she looked at the ghola. There was something inactive about him now, a latent something. He was saturated with waiting and with powers beyond their common life.
    "Out of my mother, I am like the Bene Gesserit," she said. "Do you know that?" 
    "I know it."
    "I use their powers, think as they think. Part of me knows the sacred urgency of the breeding program . . . and its products."
    She blinked, feeling part of her awareness begin to move freely in Time.
    "It's said that the Bene Gesserit never let go," he said. And he watched her closely, noting how white her knuckles were where she gripped the edge of the balcony. 
    "Have I stumbled?" she asked.
    He marked how deeply she breathed, with tension in every movement, the glazed appearance of her eyes.
    "When you stumble," he said, "you may regain your balance by jumping beyond the thing that tripped you." 
    "The Bene Gesserit stumbled," she said. "Now they wish to regain their balance by leaping beyond my brother. They want Chani's baby . . . or mine." 
    "Are you with child?"
    She struggled to fix herself in a timespace relationship to this question. With child? When? Where?
    "I see . . . my child," she whispered.
    She moved away from the balcony's edge, turned her head to look at the ghola. He had a face of salt, bitter eyes -- two circles of glistening lead . . . and, as he turned away from the light to follow her movement, blue shadows.
    "What . . . do you see with such eyes?" she whispered. 
    "What other eyes see," he said.
    His words rang in her ears, stretching her awareness. She felt that she reached across the universe -- such a stretching . . . out . . . out. She lay intertwined with all Time.
    "You've taken the spice, a large dose," he said.
    "Why can't I see him?" she muttered. The womb of all creation held her captive. "Tell me, Duncan, why I cannot see him." 
    "Who can't you see?"
    "I cannot see the father of my children. I'm lost in a Tarot fog. Help me."
    Mentat logic offered its prime computation, and he said: "The Bene Gesserit want a mating between you and your brother. It would lock the genetic . . . " 
    A wail escaped her. "The egg in the flesh," she gasped. A sensation of chill swept over her, followed by intense heat. The unseen mate of her darkest dreams! Flesh of her flesh that the oracle could not reveal -- would it come to that?
    "Have you risked a dangerous dose of the spice?" he asked. Something within him fought to express the utmost terror at the thought that an Atreides woman might die, that Paul might face him with the knowledge that a female of the royal family had . . . gone.
    "You don't know what it's like to hunt the future," she said. "Sometimes I glimpse myself . . . but I get in my own way. I cannot see through myself." She lowered her head, shook it from side to side.
    "How much of the spice did you take?" he asked.
    "Nature abhors prescience," she said, raising her head. "Did you know that, Duncan?"
    He spoke softly, reasonably, as to a small child: "Tell me how much of the spice you took." He took hold of her shoulder with his left hand.
    "Words are such gross machinery, so primitive and ambiguous," she said. She pulled away from his hand. 
    "You must tell me," he said.
    "Look at the Shield Wall," she commanded, pointing. She sent her gaze along her own outstretched hand, trembled as the landscape crumbled in an overwhelming vision -- a sandcastle destroyed by invisible waves. She averted her eyes, was transfixed by the appearance of the ghola's face. His features crawled, became aged, then young . . . aged . . . young. He was life itself, assertive, endless . . . She turned to flee, but he grabbed her left wrist.
    "I am going to summon a doctor," he said. 
    "No! You must let me have the vision! I have to know!" 
    "You are going inside now," he said.
    She stared down at his hand. Where their flesh touched, she felt an electric presence that both lured and frightened her. She jerked free, gasped: "You can't hold the whirlwind!" 
    "You must have medical help!" he snapped.
    "Don't you understand?" she demanded. "My vision's incomplete, just fragments. It flickers and jumps. I have to remember the future. Can't you see that?" 
    "What is the future if you die?" he asked, forcing her gently into the Family chambers.
    "Words . . . words," she muttered. "I can't explain it. One thing is the occasion of another thing, but there's no cause . . . no effect. We can't leave the universe as it was. Try as we may, there's a gap." 
    "Stretch out here," he commanded. 
    He is so dense! she thought.
    Cool shadows enveloped her. She felt her own muscles crawling like worms -- a firm bed that she knew to be insubstantial. Only space was permanent. Nothing else had substance. The bed flowed with many bodies, all of them her own. Time became a multiple sensation, overloaded. It presented no single reaction for her to abstract. It was Time. It moved. The whole universe slipped backward, forward, sideways.
    "It has no thing-aspect," she explained. "You can't get under it or around it. There's no place to get leverage." 
    There came a fluttering of people all around her. Many someones held her left hand. She looked at her own moving flesh, followed a twining arm out to a fluid mask of face: Duncan Idaho! His eyes were . . . wrong, but it was Duncan -- child-man-adolescent-child-man-adolescent . . . Every line of his features betrayed concern for her. 
    "Duncan, don't be afraid," she whispered. 
    He squeezed her hand, nodded. "Be still," he said.
    And he thought: She must not die! She must not! No Atreides woman can die! He shook his head sharply. Such thoughts defied mentat logic. Death was a necessity that life might continue.
    The ghola loves me, Alia thought.
    The thought became bedrock to which she might cling. He was a familiar face with a solid room behind him. She recognized one of the bedrooms in Paul's suite.
    A fixed, immutable person did something with a tube in her throat. She fought against retching.
    "We got her in time," a voice said, and she recognized the tones of a Family medic. "You should've called me sooner." There was suspicion in the medic's voice. She felt the tube slide out of her throat -- a snake, a shimmering cord.
    "The slapshot will make her sleep," the medic said. "I'll send one of her attendants to --" 
    "I will stay with her," the ghola said. 
    "That is not seemly!" the medic snapped. 
    "Stay . . . Duncan," Alia whispered. 
    He stroked her hand to tell her he'd heard. 
    "M'Lady," the medic said, "it'd be better if . . ." 
    "You do not tell me what is best," she rasped. Her throat ached with each syllable.
    "M'Lady," the medic said, voice accusing, "you know the dangers of consuming too much melange. I can only assume someone gave it to you without --" 
    "You are a fool," she rasped. "Would you deny me my visions? I knew what I took and why." She put a hand to her throat. "Leave us. At once!"
    The medic pulled out of her field of vision, said: "I will send word to your brother."
    She felt him leave, turned her attention to the ghola. The vision lay clearly in her awareness now, a culture medium in which the present grew outward. She sensed the ghola move in that play of Time, no longer cryptic, fixed now against a recognizable background.
    He is the crucible, she thought. He is danger and salvation.
    And she shuddered, knowing she saw the vision of her brother had seen. Unwanted tears burned her eyes. She shook her head sharply. No tears! They wasted moisture and, worse, distracted the harsh flow of vision. Paul must be stopped! Once, just once, she had bridged Time to place her voice where he would pass. But stress and mutability would not permit that here. The web of Time passed through her brother now like rays of light through a lens. He stood at the focus and he knew it. He had gathered all the lines to himself and would not permit them to escape or change.
    "Why?" she muttered. "Is it hate? Does he strike out at Time itself because it hurt him? Is that it . . . hate?" 
    Thinking he heard her speak his name, the ghola said: "M'Lady?"
    "If I could only burn this thing out of me!" she cried. "I didn't want to be different." 
    "Please, Alia," he murmured. "Let yourself sleep." 
    "I wanted to be able to laugh," she whispered. Tears slid down her cheeks. "But I'm sister to an Emperor who's worshipped as a god. People fear me. I never wanted to be feared." 
    He wiped the tears from her face.
    "I don't want to be part of history," she whispered. "I just want to be loved . . . and to love." 
    "You are loved," he said.
    "Ahhh, loyal, loyal Duncan," she said. 
    "Please, don't call me that," he pleaded.
    "But you are," she said. "And loyalty is a valued commodity. It can be sold . . . not bought, but sold." 
    "I don't like your cynicism," he said. 
    "Damn your logic! It's true!" 
    "Sleep," he said.
    "Do you love me, Duncan?" she asked. 
    "Yes."
    "Is that one of those lies," she asked, "one of the lies that are easier to believe than the truth? Why am I afraid to believe you?" 
    "You fear my differences as you fear your own." 
    "Be a man, not a mentat!" she snarled. 
    "I am a mentat and a man." 
    "Will you make me your woman, then?" 
    "I will do what love demands." 
    "And loyalty?" 
    "And loyalty." 
    "That's where you're dangerous," she said.
    Her words disturbed him. No sign of the disturbance arose to his face, no muscle trembled -- but she knew it. Vision-memory exposed the disturbance. She felt she had missed part of the vision, though, that she should remember something else from the future. There existed another perception which did not go precisely by the senses, a thing which fell into her head from nowhere the way prescience did. It lay in the Time shadows -- infinitely painful.
    Emotion! That was it -- emotion! It had appeared in the vision, not directly, but as a product from which she could infer what lay behind. She had been possessed by emotion -- a single constriction made up of fear, grief and love. They lay there in the vision, all collected into a single epidemic body, overpowering and primordial.
    "Duncan, don't let me go," she whispered.
    "Sleep," he said. "Don't fight it."
    "I must . . . I must. He's the bait in his own trap. He's the servant of power and terror. Violence . . . deification is a prison enclosing him. He'll lose . . . everything. It'll tear him apart." 
    "You speak of Paul?"
    "They drive him to destroy himself," she gasped, arching her back. "Too much weight, too much grief. They seduce him away from love." She sank back to the bed. "They're creating a universe where he won't permit himself to live." 
    "Who is doing this?"
    "He is! Ohhh, you're so dense. He's part of the pattern. And it's too late . . . too late . . . too late . . ." 
    As she spoke, she felt her awareness descend, layer by layer. It came to rest directly behind her navel. Body and mind separated and merged in a storehouse of relic visions -- moving, moving . . . She heard a fetal heartbeat, a child of the future. The melange still possessed her, then, setting her adrift in Time. She knew she had tasted the life of a child not yet conceived. One thing certain about this child -- it would suffer the same awakening she had suffered. It would be an aware, thinking entity before birth.

= = = = = =

There exists a limit to the force even the most powerful may apply without destroying themselves. Judging this limit is the true artistry of government. Misuse of power is the fatal sin. The law cannot be a tool of vengeance, never a hostage, nor a fortification against the martyrs it has created. You cannot threaten any individual and escape the consequences.
-Muad'dib on Law, The Stilgar Commentary

    Chani stared out at the morning desert framed in the fault cleft below Sietch Tabr. She wore no stillsuit, and this made her feel unprotected here in the desert. The sietch grotto's entrance lay hidden in the buttressed cliff above and behind her.
    The desert . . . the desert . . . She felt that the desert had followed her wherever she had gone. Coming back to the desert was not so much a homecoming as a turning around to see what had always been there.
    A painful constriction surged through her abdomen. The birth would be soon. She fought down the pain, wanting this moment alone with her desert.
    Dawn stillness gripped the land. Shadows fled among the dunes and terraces of the Shield Wall all around. Daylight lunged over the high scarp and plunged her up to her eyes in a bleak landscape stretching beneath a washed blue sky. The scene matched the feeling of dreadful cynicism which had tormented her since the moment she'd learned of Paul's blindness. 
    Why are we here? she wondered.
    It was not a hajra, a journey of seeking. Paul sought nothing here except, perhaps, a place for her to give birth. He had summoned odd companions for this journey, she thought -- Bijaz, the Tleilaxu dwarf; the ghola, Hayt, who might be Duncan Idaho's revenant; Edric, the Guild Steersman-Ambassador; Gaius Helen Mohiam, the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother he so obviously hated; Lichna, Otheym's strange daughter, who seemed unable to move beyond the watchful eyes of guards; Stilgar, her uncle of the Naibs, and his favorite wife, Harah . . . and Irulan . . . Alia . . . 
    The sound of wind through the rocks accompanied her thoughts. The desert day had become yellow on yellow, tan on tan, gray on gray.
    Why such a strange mixture of companions?
    "We have forgotten," Paul had said in response to her question, "that the word 'company' originally meant traveling companions. We are a company." 
    "But what value are they?"
    "There!" he'd said, turning his frightful sockets toward her. "We've lost that clear, single-note of living. If it cannot be bottled, beaten, pointed or hoarded, we give it no value." 
    Hurt, she'd said: "That's not what I meant." 
    "Ahhh, dearest one," he'd said, soothing, "we are so money-rich and so life-poor. I am evil, obstinate, stupid . . . " 
    "You are not!"
    "That, too, is true. But my hands are blue with time. I think . . . I think I tried to invent life, not realizing it'd already been invented."
    And he'd touched her abdomen to feel the new life there.
    Remembering, she placed both hands over her abdomen and trembled, sorry that she'd asked Paul to bring her here.
    The desert wind had stirred up evil odors from the fringe plantings which anchored the dunes at the cliff base. Fremen superstition gripped her: evil odors, evil times. She faced into the wind, saw a worm appear outside the plantings. It arose like the prow of a demon ship out of the dunes, threshed sand, smelled the water deadly to its kind, and fled beneath a long, burrowing mound.
    She hated the water then, inspired by the worm's fear. Water, once the spirit-soul of Arrakis, had become a poison. Water brought pestilence. Only the desert was clean.
    Below her, a Fremen work gang appeared. They climbed to the sietch's middle entrance, and she saw that they had muddy feet.
    Fremen with muddy feet!
    The children of the sietch began singing to the morning above her, their voices piping from the upper entrance. The voices made her feel time fleeing from her like hawks before the wind. She shuddered.
    What storms did Paul see with his eyeless vision?
    She sensed a vicious madman in him, someone weary of songs and polemics.
    The sky, she noted, had become crystal gray filled with alabaster rays, bizarre designs etched across the heavens by windborne sand. A line of gleaming white in the south caught her attention. Eves suddenly alerted, she interpreted the sign: White sky in the south: Shai-hulud's mouth. A storm came, big wind. She felt the warning breeze, a crystal blowing of sand against her cheeks. The incense of death came on the wind: odors of water flowing in qanats, sweating sand, flint. The water -- that was why Shai-hulud sent his coriolis wind.
    Hawks appeared in the cleft where she stood, seeking safety from the wind. They were brown as the rocks and with scarlet in their wings. She felt her spirit go out to them: they had a place to hide; she had none. 
    "M'Lady, the wind comes!"
    She turned, saw the ghola calling to her outside the upper entrance to the sietch. Fremen fears gripped her. Clean death and the body's water claimed for the tribe, these she understood. But . . . something brought back from death . . .
    Windblown sand whipped at her, reddened her cheeks. She glanced over her shoulder at the frightful band of dust across the sky. The desert beneath the storm had taken on a tawny, restless appearance as though dune waves beat on a tempest shore the way Paul had once described a sea. She hesitated, caught by a feeling of the desert's transience. Measured against eternity, this was no more than a caldron. Dune surf thundered against cliffs.
    The storm out there had become a universal thing for her -- all the animals hiding from it . . . nothing left of the desert but its own private sounds: blown sand scraping along rock, a wind-surge whistling, the gallop of a boulder tumbled suddenly from its hill -- then! somewhere out of sight, a capsized worm thumping its idiot way aright and slithering off to its dry depths.
    It was only a moment as her life measured time, but in that moment she felt this planet being swept away -- cosmic dust, part of other waves.
    "We must hurry," the ghola said from right beside her. 
    She sensed fear in him then, concern for her safety.
    "It'll shred the flesh from your bones," he said, as though he needed to explain such a storm to her.
    Her fear of him dispelled by his obvious concern, Chani allowed the ghola to help her up the rock stairway to the sietch. They entered the twisting baffle which protected the entrance. Attendants opened the moisture seals, closed them behind.
    Sietch odors assaulted her nostrils. The place was a ferment of nasal memories -- the warren closeness of bodies, rank esters of the reclamation stills, familiar food aromas, the flinty burning of machines at work . . . and through it all, the omnipresent spice: melange everywhere.
    She took a deep breath. "Home."
    The ghola took his hand from her arm, stood aside, a patient figure now, almost as though turned off when not in use. Yet . . . he watched.
    Chani hesitated in the entrance chamber, puzzled by something she could not name. This was truly her home. As a child, she'd hunted scorpions here by glowglobe light. Something was changed, though . . . 
    "Shouldn't you be going to your quarters, m'Lady?" the ghola asked.
    As though ignited by his words, a rippling birth constriction seized her abdomen. She fought against revealing it.
    "M'Lady?" the ghola said.
    "Why is Paul afraid for me to bear our children?" she asked.
    "It is a natural thing to fear for your safety," the ghola said.
    She put a hand to her cheek where the sand had reddened it. "And he doesn't fear for the children?" 
    "M'Lady, he cannot think of a child without remembering that your firstborn was slain by the Sardaukar."
    She studied the ghola -- flat face, unreadable mechanical eyes. Was he truly Duncan Idaho, this creature? Was he friend to anyone? Had he spoken truthfully now?
    "You should be with the medics," the ghola said.
    Again, she heard the fear for her safety in his voice. She felt abruptly that her mind lay undefended, ready to be invaded by shocking perceptions.
    "Hayt, I'm afraid," she whispered. "Where is my Usul?"
    "Affairs of state detain him," the ghola said.
    She nodded, thinking of the government apparatus which had accompanied them in a great flight of ornithopters. Abruptly, she realized what puzzled her about the sietch: outworld odors. The clerks and aides had brought their own perfumes into this environment, aromas of diet and clothing, of exotic toiletries. They were an undercurrent of odors here.
    Chani shook herself, concealing an urge to bitter laughter. Even the smells changed in Muad'dib's presence!
    "There were pressing matters which he could not defer," the ghola said, misreading her hesitation.
    "Yes . . . yes, I understand. I came with that swarm, too."
    Recalling the flight from Arrakeen, she admitted to herself now that she had not expected to survive it. Paul had insisted on piloting his own 'thopter. Eyeless, he had guided the machine here. After that experience, she knew nothing he did could surprise her.
    Another pain fanned out through her abdomen.
    The ghola saw her indrawn breath, the tightening of her cheeks, said: "Is it your time?" 
    "I . . . yes, it is."
    "You must not delay," he said. He grasped her arm, hurried her down the hall.
    She sensed panic in him, said: "There's time." 
    He seemed not to hear. "The Zensunni approach to birth," he said, urging her even faster, "is to wait without purpose in the state of highest tension. Do not compete with what is happening. To compete is to prepare for failure. Do not be trapped by the need to achieve anything. This way, you achieve everything."
    While he spoke, they reached the entrance to her quarters. He thrust her through the hangings, cried out: "Harah! Harah! It is Chani's time. Summon the medics!" 
    His call brought attendants running. There was a great bustling of people in which Chani felt herself an isolated island of calm . . . until the next pain came.
    Hayt, dismissed to the outer passage, took time to wonder at his own actions. He felt fixated at some point of time where all truths were only temporary. Panic lay beneath his actions, he realized. Panic centered not on the possibility that Chani might die, but that Paul should come to him afterward . . . filled with grief . . . his loved one . . . gone . . . gone . . . 
    Something cannot emerge from nothing, the ghola told himself. From what does this panic emerge?
    He felt that his mentat faculties had been dulled, let out a long, shuddering breath. A psychic shadow passed over him. In the emotional darkness of it, he felt himself waiting for some absolute sound -- the snap of a branch in a jungle.
    A sigh shook him. Danger had passed without striking.
    Slowly, marshaling his powers, shedding bits of inhibition, he sank into mentat awareness. He forced it -- not the best way -- but somehow necessary. Ghost shadows moved within him in place of people. He was a transshipping station for every datum he had ever encountered. His being was inhabited by creatures of possibility. They passed in review to be compared, judged. 
    Perspiration broke out on his forehead.
    Thoughts with fuzzy edges feathered away into darkness -- unknown. Infinite systems! A mentat could not function without realizing he worked in infinite systems. Fixed knowledge could not surround the infinite. Everywhere could not be brought into finite perspective. Instead, he must become the infinite -- momentarily.
    In one gestalten spasm, he had it, seeing Bijaz seated before him blazing from some inner fire.
    Bijaz!
    The dwarf had done something to him!
    Hayt felt himself teetering on the lip of a deadly pit. He projected the mentat computation line forward, seeing what could develop out of his own actions.
    "A compulsion!" he gasped. "I've been rigged with a compulsion!"
    A blue-robed courier, passing as Hayt spoke, hesitated. "Did you say something, sirra?"
    Not looking at him, the ghola nodded. "I said everything."

= = = = = =

There was a man so wise, 
He jumped into 
A sandy place 
And burnt out both his eyes!
And when he knew his eyes were gone, 
He offered no complaint. 
He summoned up a vision 
And made himself a saint.
-Children's Verse from History of Muad'dib

    Paul stood in darkness outside the sietch. Oracular vision told him it was night, that moonlight silhouetted the shrine atop Chin Rock high on his left. This was a memory-saturated place, his first sietch, where he and Chani . . . 
    I must not think of Chani, he told himself.
    The thinning cup of his vision told him of changes all around -- a cluster of palms far down to the right, the black-silver line of a qanat carrying water through the dunes piled up by that morning's storm.
    Water flowing in the desert! He recalled another kind of water flowing in a river of his birthworld, Caladan. He hadn't realized then the treasure of such a flow, even the murky slithering in a qanat across a desert basin. Treasure.
    With a delicate cough, an aide came up from behind.
    Paul held out his hands for a magnabord with a single sheet of metallic paper on it. He moved as sluggishly as the qanat's water. The vision flowed, but he found himself increasingly reluctant to move with it.
    "Pardon, Sire," the aide said. "The Semboule Treaty -- your signature?"
    "I can read it!" Paul snapped. He scrawled "Atreides Imper." in the proper place, returned the board, thrusting it directly into the aide's outstretched hand, aware of the fear this inspired. 
    The man fled.
    Paul turned away. Ugly, barren land! He imagined it sun-soaked and monstrous with heat, a place of sandslides and the drowned darkness of dust pools, blowdevils unreeling tiny dunes across the rocks, their narrow bellies full of ochre crystals. But it was a rich land, too: big, exploding out of narrow places with vistas of storm-trodden emptiness, rampart cliffs and tumbledown ridges.
    All it required was water . . . and love.
    Life changed those irascible wastes into shapes of grace and movement, he thought. That was the message of the desert. Contrast stunned him with realization. He wanted to turn to the aides massed in the sietch entrance, shout at them: If you need something to worship, then worship life -- all life, every last crawling bit of it! We're all in this beauty together!
    They wouldn't understand. In the desert, they were endlessly desert. Growing things performed no green ballet for them.
    He clenched his fists at his sides, trying to halt the vision. He wanted to flee from his own mind. It was a beast come to devour him! Awareness lay in him, sodden, heavy with all the living it had sponged up, saturated with too many experiences.
    Desperately, Paul squeezed his thoughts outward. 
    Stars!
    Awareness turned over at the thought of all those stars above him -- an infinite volume. A man must be half mad to imagine he could rule even a teardrop of that volume. He couldn't begin to imagine the number of subjects his Imperium claimed.
    Subjects? Worshippers and enemies, more likely. Did any among them see beyond rigid beliefs? Where was one man who'd escaped the narrow destiny of his prejudices? Not even an Emperor escaped. He'd lived a 'take everything' life, tried to create a universe in his own image. But the exultant universe was breaking across him at last with its silent waves.
    I spit on Dune! he thought. I give it my moisture!
    This myth he'd made out of intricate movements and imagination, out of moonlight and love, out of prayers older than Adam, and gray cliffs and crimson shadows, laments and rivers of martyrs -- what had it come to at last? When the waves receded, the shores of Time would spread out there clean, empty, shining with infinite grains of memory and little else. Was this the golden genesis of man?
    Sand scuffed against rocks told him that the ghola had joined him.
    "You've been avoiding me today, Duncan," Paul said. 
    "It's dangerous for you to call me that," the ghola said. 
    "I know." 
    "I . . . came to warn you, m'Lord."
    "I know."
    The story of the compulsion Bijaz had put on him poured from the ghola then.
    "Do you know the nature of the compulsion?" Paul asked.
    "Violence."
    Paul felt himself arriving at a place which had claimed him from the beginning. He stood suspended. The Jihad had seized him, fixed him onto a glidepath from which the terrible gravity of the Future would never release him.
    "There'll be no violence from Duncan," Paul whispered.
    "But, Sire . . . " 
    "Tell me what you see around us," Paul said. 
    "M'Lord?" 
    "The desert -- how is it tonight?" 
    "Don't you see it?" 
    "I have no eyes, Duncan." 
    "But . . . "
    "I've only my vision," Paul said, "and wish I didn't have it. I'm dying of prescience, did you know that, Duncan?"
    "Perhaps . . . what you fear won't happen," the ghola said.
    "What? Deny my own oracle? How can I when I've seen it fulfilled thousands of time? People call it a power, a gift. It's an affliction! It won't let me leave my life where I found it!"
    "M'Lord," the ghola muttered, "I . . . it isn't . . . young master, you don't . . . I . . . " He fell silent.
    Paul sensed the ghola's confusion, said: "What'd you call me, Duncan?" 
    "What? What I . . . for a moment . . ." 
    "You called me 'young master.' "
    "I did, yes." 
    "That's what Duncan always called me." Paul reached out, touched the ghola's face. "Was that part of your Tleilaxu training?" 
    "No." 
    Paul lowered his hand. "What, then?" 
    "It came from . . . me." 
    "Do you serve two masters?" 
    "Perhaps." 
    "Free yourself from the ghola, Duncan." 
    "How?" 
    "You're human. Do a human thing." 
    "I'm a ghola!" 
    "But your flesh is human. Duncan's in there." 
    "Something's in there." 
    "I care not how you do it," Paul said, "but you'll do it." 
    "You've foreknowledge?"
    "Foreknowledge be damned!" Paul turned away. His vision hurtled forward now, gaps in it, but it wasn't a thing to be stopped. 
    "M'Lord, if you've --" 
    "Quiet!" Paul held up a hand. "Did you hear that?" 
    "Hear what, m'Lord?"
    Paul shook his head. Duncan hadn't heard it. Had he only imagined the sound? It'd been his tribal name called from the desert -- far away and low: "Usul . . . Uuuussssuuuullll . . . " 
    "What is it, m'Lord?"
    Paul shook his head. He felt watched. Something out there in the night shadows knew he was here. Something? No -- someone.
    "It was mostly sweet," he whispered, "and you were the sweetest of all." 
    "What'd you say, m'Lord?" 
    "It's the future," Paul said.
    That amorphous human universe out there had undergone a spurt of motion, dancing to the tune of his vision. It had struck a powerful note then. The ghost-echoes might endure.
    "I don't understand, m'Lord," the ghola said.
    "A Fremen dies when he's too long from the desert," Paul said. "They call it the 'water sickness.' Isn't that odd?"
    "That's very odd."
    Paul strained at memories, tried to recall the sound of Chani breathing beside him in the night. Where is there comfort? he wondered. All he could remember was Chani at breakfast the day they'd left for the desert. She'd been restless, irritable.
    "Why do you wear that old jacket?" she'd demanded, eyeing the black uniform coat with its red hawk crest beneath his Fremen robes. "You're an Emperor!" 
    "Even an Emperor has his favorite clothing," he'd said.
    For no reason he could explain, this had brought real tears to Chani's eyes -- the second time in her life when Fremen inhibitions had been shattered.
    Now, in the darkness, Paul rubbed his own cheeks, felt moisture there. Who gives moisture to the dead? he wondered. It was his own face, yet not his. The wind chilled the wet skin. A frail dream formed, broke. What was this swelling in his breast? Was it something he'd eaten? How bitter and plaintive was this other self, giving moisture to the dead. The wind bristled with sand. The skin, dry now, was his own. But whose was the quivering which remained?
    They heard the wailing then, far away in the sietch depths. It grew louder . . . louder . . . 
    The ghola whirled at a sudden glare of light, someone flinging wide the entrance seals. In the light, he saw a man with a raffish grin -- no! Not a grin, but a grimace of grief! It was a Fedaykin lieutenant named Tandis. Behind him came a press of many people, all fallen silent now that they saw Muad'dib.
    "Chani . . ." Tandis said.
    "Is dead," Paul whispered. "I heard her call." 
    He turned toward the sietch. He knew this place. It was a place where he could not hide. His onrushing vision illuminated the entire Fremen mob. He saw Tandis, felt the Fedaykin's grief, the fear and anger. 
    "She is gone," Paul said.
    The ghola heard the words out of a blazing corona. They burned his chest, his backbone, the sockets of his metal eyes. He felt his right hand move toward the knife at his belt. His own thinking became strange, disjointed. He was a puppet held fast by strings reaching down from that awful corona. He moved to another's commands, to another's desires. The strings jerked his arms, his legs, his jaw. Sounds came squeezing out of his mouth, a terrifying repetitive noise -- 
    "Hrrak! Hraak! Hraak!"
    The knife came up to strike. In that instant, he grabbed his own voice, shaped rasping words: "Run! Young master, run!"
    "We will not run," Paul said. "We'll move with dignity. We'll do what must be done." 
    The ghola's muscles locked. He shuddered, swayed.
    " . . . what must be done!" The words rolled in his mind like a great fish surfacing. " . . . what must be done!" Ahhh, that had sounded like the old Duke, Paul's grandfather. The young master had some of the old man in him. " . . . what must be done!"
    The words began to unfold in the ghola's consciousness. A sensation of living two lives simultaneously spread out through his awareness: Hayt/Idaho/Hayt/Idaho . . . He became a motionless chain of relative existence, singular, alone. Old memories flooded his mind. He marked them, adjusted them to new understandings, made a beginning at the integration of a new awareness. A new persona achieved a temporary form of internal tyranny. The masculating synthesis remained charged with potential disorder, but events pressed him to the temporary adjustment. The young master needed him.
    It was done then. He knew himself as Duncan Idaho, remembering everything of Hayt as though it had been stored secretly in him and ignited by a flaming catalyst. The corona dissolved. He shed the Tleilaxu compulsions.
    "Stay close to me, Duncan," Paul said. "I'll need to depend on you for many things." And, as Idaho continued to stand entranced: "Duncan!" 
    "Yes, I am Duncan."
    "Of course you are! This was the moment when you came back. We'll go inside now."
    Idaho fell into step beside Paul. It was like the old times, yet not like them. Now that he stood free of the Tleilaxu, he could appreciate what they had given him. Zensunni training permitted him to overcome the shock of events. The mentat accomplishment formed a counterbalance. He put off all fear, standing above the source. His entire consciousness looked outward from a position of infinite wonder: he had, been dead; he was alive.
    "Sire," the Fedaykin Tandis said as they approached him, "the woman, Lichna, says she must see you. I told her to wait." 
    "Thank you," Paul said. "The birth . . . " 
    "I spoke to the medics," Tandis said, falling into step. "They said you have two children, both of them alive and sound." 
    "Two?" Paul stumbled, caught himself on Idaho's arm.
    "A boy and a girl," Tandis said. "I saw them. They're good Fremen babies." 
    "How . . . how did she die?" Paul whispered. 
    "M'Lord?" Tandis bent close. 
    "Chani?" Paul said.
    "It was the birth, m'Lord," Tandis husked. "They said her body was drained by the speed of it. I don't understand, but that is what they said." 
    "Take me to her," Paul whispered. 
    "M'Lord?" 
    "Take me to her!"
    "That's where we're going, m'Lord." Again, Tandis bent close to Paul. "Why does your ghola carry a bared knife?"
    "Duncan, put away your knife," Paul said. "The time for violence is past."
    As he spoke, Paul felt closer to the sound of his voice than to the mechanism which had created the sound. Two babies! The vision had contained but one. Yet, these moments went as the vision went. There was a person here who felt grief and anger. Someone. His own awareness lay in the grip of an awful treadmill, replaying his life from memory.
    Two babies?
    Again he stumbled. Chani, Chani, he thought. There was no other way. Chani, beloved, believe me that this death was quicker for you . . . and kinder. They'd have held our children hostage, displayed you in a cage and slave pits, reviled you with the blame for my death. This way . . . this way we destroy them and save our children. 
    Children?
    Once more, he stumbled.
    I permitted this, he thought. I should feel guilty.
    The sound of noisy confusion filled the cavern ahead of them. It grew louder precisely as he remembered it growing louder. Yes, this was the pattern, the inexorable pattern, even with two children. 
    Chani is dead, he told himself.
    At some faraway instant in a past which he had shared with others, this future had reached down to him. It had chivvied him and herded him into a chasm whose walls grew narrower and narrower. He could feel them closing in on him. This was the way the vision went. 
    Chani is dead. I should abandon myself to grief. 
    But that was not the way the vision went. 
    "Has Alia been summoned?" he asked. 
    "She is with Chani's friends," Tandis said.
    Paul sensed the mob pressing back to give him passage. Their silence moved ahead of him like a wave. The noisy confusion began dying down. A sense of congested emotion filled the sietch. He wanted to remove the people from his vision, found it impossible. Every face turning to follow him carried its special imprint. They were pitiless with curiosity, those faces. They felt grief, yes, but he understood the cruelty which drenched them. They were watching the articulate become dumb, the wise become a fool. Didn't the clown always appeal to cruelty? 
    This was more than a deathwatch, less than a wake.
    Paul felt his soul begging for respite, but still the vision moved him. Just a little farther now, he told himself. Black, visionless dark awaited him just ahead. There lay the place ripped out of the vision by grief and guilt, the place where the moon fell.
    He stumbled into it, would've fallen had Idaho not taken his arm in a fierce grip, a solid presence knowing how to share his grief in silence. 
    "Here is the place," Tandis said.
    "Watch your step, Sire," Idaho said, helping him over an entrance lip. Hangings brushed Paul's face. Idaho pulled him to a halt. Paul felt the room then, a reflection against his cheeks and ears. It was a rock-walled space with the rock hidden behind tapestries. 
    "Where is Chani?" Paul whispered.
    Harah's voice answered him: "She is right here, Usul." 
    Paul heaved a trembling sigh. He had feared her body already had been removed to the stills where Fremen reclaimed the water of the tribe. Was that the way the vision went? He felt abandoned in his blindness. 
    "The children?" Paul asked.
    "They are here, too, m'Lord," Idaho said.
    "You have beautiful twins, Usul," Harah said, "a boy and a girl. See? We have them here in a creche." 
    Two children, Paul thought wonderingly. The vision had contained only a daughter. He cast himself adrift from Idaho's arm, moved toward the place where Harah had spoken, stumbled into a hard surface. His hands explored it: the metaglass outlines of a creche.
    Someone took his left arm. "Usul?" It was Harah. She guided his hand into the creche. He felt soft-soft flesh. It was so warm! He felt ribs, breathing.
    "That is your son," Harah whispered. She moved his hand. "And this is your daughter." Her hand tightened on his. "Usul, are you truly blind now?"
    He knew what she was thinking. The blind must be abandoned in the desert. Fremen tribes carried no dead weight.
    "Take me to Chani," Paul said, ignoring her question. 
    Harah turned him, guided him to the left.
    Paul felt himself accepting now the fact that Chani was dead. He had taken his place in a universe he did not want, wearing flesh that did not fit. Every breath he drew bruised his emotions. Two children! He wondered if he had committed himself to a passage where his vision would never return. It seemed unimportant. 
    "Where is my brother?"
    It was Alia's voice behind him. He heard the rush of her, the overwhelming presence as she took his arm from Harah.
    "I must speak to you!" Alia hissed. 
    "In a moment," Paul said. 
    "Now! It's about Lichna." 
    "I know," Paul said. "In a moment." 
    "You don't have a moment!" 
    "I have many moments." 
    "But Chani doesn't!"
    "Be still!" he ordered. "Chani is dead." He put a hand across her mouth as she started to protest. "I order you to be still!" He felt her subside and removed his hand. "Describe what you see," he said.
    "Paul!" Frustration and tears battled in her voice.
    "Never mind," he said. And he forced himself to inner stillness, opened the eyes of his vision to this moment. Yes -- it was still here. Chani's body lay on a pallet within a ring of light. Someone had straightened her white robe, smoothed it trying to hide the blood from the birth. No matter; he could not turn his awareness from the vision of her face: such a mirror of eternity in the still features!
    He turned away, but the vision moved with him. She was gone . . . never to return. The air, the universe, all vacant -- everywhere vacant. Was this the essence of his penance? he wondered. He wanted tears, but they would not come. Had he lived too long a Fremen? This death demanded its moisture!
    Nearby, a baby cried and was hushed. The sound pulled a curtain on his vision. Paul welcomed the darkness. This is another world, he thought. Two children.
    The thought came out of some lost oracular trance. He tried to recapture the timeless mind-dilation of the melange, but awareness fell short. No burst of the future came into this new consciousness. He felt himself rejecting the future -- any future. 
    "Goodbye, my Sihaya," he whispered.
    Alia's voice, harsh and demanding, came from somewhere behind him. "I've brought Lichna!"
    Paul turned. "That's not Lichna," he said. "That's a Face Dancer. Lichna's dead." 
    "But hear what she says," Alia said. 
    Slowly, Paul moved toward his sister's voice.
    "I'm not surprised to find you alive, Atreides." The voice was like Lichna's, but with subtle differences, as though the speaker used Lichna's vocal cords, but no longer bothered to control them sufficiently. Paul found himself struck by an odd note of honesty in the voice. 
    "Not surprised?" Paul asked.
    "I am Scytale, a Tleilaxu of the Face Dancers, and I would know a thing before we bargain. Is that a ghola I see behind you, or Duncan Idaho?"
    "It's Duncan Idaho," Paul said. "And I will not bargain with you." 
    "I think you'll bargain," Scytale said.
    "Duncan," Paul said, speaking over his shoulder, "will you kill this Tleilaxu if I ask it?"
    "Yes, m'Lord." There was the suppressed rage of a berserker in Idaho's voice.
    "Wait!" Alia said. "You don't know what you're rejecting."
    "But I do know," Paul said.
    "So it's truly Duncan Idaho of the Atreides," Scytale said. "We found the lever! A ghola can regain his past." Paul heard footsteps. Someone brushed past him on the left. Scytale's voice came from behind him now. "What do you remember of your past, Duncan?"
    "Everything. From my childhood on. I even remember you at the tank when they removed me from it," Idaho said.
    "Wonderful," Scytale breathed. "Wonderful." 
    Paul heard the voice moving. I need a vision, he thought. Darkness frustrated him. Bene Gesserit training warned him of terrifying menace in Scytale, yet the creature remained a voice, a shadow of movement -- entirely beyond him.
    "Are these the Atreides babies?" Scytale asked. 
    "Harah!" Paul cried. "Get her away from there!" 
    "Stay where you are!" Scytale shouted. "All of you! I warn you, a Face Dancer can move faster than you suspect. My knife can have both these lives before you touch me."
    Paul felt someone touch his right arm, then move off to the right.
    "That's far enough, Alia," Scytale said. 
    "Alia," Paul said. "Don't." 
    "It's my fault," Alia groaned. "My fault!" 
    "Atreides," Scytale said, "shall we bargain now?" 
    Behind him, Paul heard a single hoarse curse. His throat constricted at the suppressed violence in Idaho's voice. Idaho must not break! Scytale would kill the babies!
    "To strike a bargain, one requires a thing to sell," Scytale said. "Not so, Atreides? Will you have your Chani back? We can restore her to you. A ghola, Atreides. A ghola with full memory! But we must hurry. Call your friends to bring a cryologic tank to preserve the flesh." 
    To hear Chani's voice once more, Paul thought. To feel her presence beside me. Ahhh, that's why they gave me Idaho as a ghola, to let me discover how much the re-creation is like the original. But now -- full restoration . . . at their price. I'd be a Tleilaxu tool forevermore. And Chani . . . chained to the same fate by a threat to our children, exposed once more to the Qizarate's plotting . . . 
    "What pressures would you use to restore Chani's memory to her?" Paul asked, fighting to keep his voice calm. "Would you condition her to . . . to kill one of her own children?"
    "We use whatever pressures we need," Scytale said. "What say you, Atreides?"
    "Alia," Paul said, "bargain with this thing. I cannot bargain with what I cannot see."
    "A wise choice," Scytale gloated. "Well, Alia, what do you offer me as your brother's agent?"
    Paul lowered his head, bringing himself to stillness within stillness. He'd glimpsed something just then -- like a vision, but not a vision. It had been a knife close to him. There!
    "Give me a moment to think," Alia said.
    "My knife is patient," Scytale said, "but Chani's flesh is not. Take a reasonable amount of time."
    Paul felt himself blinking. It could not be . . . but it was! He felt eyes! Their vantage point was odd and they moved in an erratic way. There! The knife swam into his view. With a breath-stilling shock, Paul recognized the viewpoint. It was that of one of his children! He was seeing Scytale's knife hand from within the creche! It glittered only inches from him. Yes -- and he could see himself across the room, as well -- head down, standing quietly, a figure of no menace, ignored by the others in this room.
    "To begin, you might assign us all your CHOAM holdings," Scytale suggested. 
    "All of them?" Alia protested. 
    "All."
    Watching himself through the eyes in the creche, Paul slipped his crysknife from its belt sheath. The movement produced a strange sensation of duality. He measured the distance, the angle. There'd be no second chance. He prepared his body then in the Bene Gesserit way, armed himself like a cocked spring for a single concentrated movement, a prajna thing requiring all his muscles balanced in one exquisite unity.
    The crysknife leaped from his hand. The milky blur of it flashed into Scytale's right eye, jerked the Face Dancer's head back. Scytale threw both hands up and staggered backward against the wall. His knife clattered off the ceiling, to hit the floor. Scytale rebounded from the wall; he fell face forward, dead before he touched the floor.
    Still through the eyes in the creche, Paul watched the faces in the room turn toward his eyeless figure, read the combined shock. Then Alia rushed to the creche, bent over it and hid the view from him.
    "Oh, they're safe," Alia said. "They're safe." 
    "M'Lord," Idaho whispered, "was that part of your vision?"
    "No." He waved a hand in Idaho's direction. "Let it be."
    "Forgive me, Paul," Alia said. "But when that creature said they could . . . revive . . . "
    "There are some prices an Atreides cannot pay," Paul said. "You know that." 
    "I know," she sighed. "But I was tempted . . . " 
    "Who was not tempted?" Paul asked.
    He turned away from them, groped his way to a wall, leaned against it and tried to understand what he had done. How? How? The eyes in the creche! He felt poised on the brink of terrifying revelation. 
    "My eyes, father."
    The word-shapings shimmered before his sightless vision.
    "My son!" Paul whispered, too low for any to hear. "You're . . . aware." 
    "Yes, father. Look!"
    Paul sagged against the wall in a spasm of dizziness. He felt that he'd been upended and drained. His own life whipped past him. He saw his father. He was his father. And the grandfather, and the grandfathers before that. His awareness tumbled through a mind-shattering corridor of his whole male line. 
    "How?" he asked silently.
    Faint word-shapings appeared, faded and were gone, as though the strain was too great. Paul wiped saliva from the corner of his mouth. He remembered the awakening of Alia in the Lady Jessica's womb. But there had been no Water of Life, no overdose of melange this time . . . or had there? Had Chani's hunger been for that? Or was this somehow the genetic product of his line, foreseen by the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam?
    Paul felt himself in the creche then, with Alia cooing over him. Her hands soothed him. Her face loomed, a giant thing directly over him. She turned him then and he saw his creche companion -- a girl with that bony-ribbed look of strength which came from a desert heritage. She had a full head of tawny red hair. As he stared, she opened her eyes. Those eyes! Chani peered out of her eyes . . . and the Lady Jessica. A multitude peered out of those eyes.
    "Look at that," Alia said. "They're staring at each other." 
    "Babies can't focus at this age," Harah said. 
    "I could," Alia said.
    Slowly, Paul felt himself being disengaged from that endless awareness. He was back at his own wailing wall then, leaning against it. Idaho shook his shoulder gently. 
    "M'Lord?"
    "Let my son be called Leto for my father," Paul said, straightening.
    "At the time of naming," Harah said, "I will stand beside you as a friend of the mother and give that name." 
    "And my daughter," Paul said. "Let her be called Ghanima."
    "Usul!" Harah objected. "Ghanima's an ill-omened name."
    "It saved your life," Paul said. "What matter that Alia made fun of you with that name? My daughter is Ghanima, a spoil of war."
    Paul heard wheels squeak behind him then -- the pallet with Chani's body being moved. The chant of the Water Rite began.
    "Hal yawm!" Harah said. "I must leave now if I am to be the observer of the holy truth and stand beside my friend for the last time. Her water belongs to the tribe." 
    "Her water belongs to the tribe," Paul murmured. He heard Harah leave. He groped outward and found Idaho's sleeve. "Take me to my quarters, Duncan." 
    Inside his quarters, he shook himself free gently. It was a time to be alone. But before Idaho could leave there was a disturbance at the door.
    "Master!" It was Bijaz calling from the doorway.
    "Duncan," Paul said, "let him come two paces forward. Kill him if he comes farther." 
    "Ayyah," Idaho said.
    "Duncan is it?" Bijaz asked. "Is it truly Duncan Idaho?" 
    "It is," Idaho said. "I remember." 
    "Then Scytale's plan succeeded!" 
    "Scytale is dead," Paul said.
    "But I am not and the plan is not," Bijaz said. "By the tank in which I grew! It can be done! I shall have my pasts -- all of them. It needs only the right trigger." 
    "Trigger?" Paul asked.
    "The compulsion to kill you," Idaho said, rage thick in his voice. "Mentat computation: They found that I thought of you as the son I never had. Rather than slay you, the true Duncan Idaho would take over the ghola body. But . . . it might have failed. Tell me, dwarf, if your plan had failed, if I'd killed him, what then?" 
    "Oh . . . then we'd have bargained with the sister to save her brother. But this way the bargaining is better." 
    Paul took a shuddering breath. He could hear the mourners moving down the last passage now toward the deep rooms and the water stills.
    "It's not too late, m'Lord," Bijaz said. "Will you have your love back? We can restore her to you. A ghola, yes. But now -- we hold out the full restoration. Shall we summon servants with a cryological tank, preserve the flesh of your beloved . . . "
    It was harder now, Paul found. He had exhausted his powers in the first Tleilaxu temptation. And now all that was for nothing! To feel Chani's presence once more . . .
    "Silence him," Paul told Idaho, speaking in Atreides battle tongue. He heard Idaho move toward the door. 
    "Master!" Bijaz squeaked.
    "As you love me," Paul said, still in battle tongue, "do me this favor: Kill him before I succumb!" 
    "Noooooo . . . " Bijaz screamed.
    The sound stopped abruptly with a frightened grunt. 
    "I did him the kindness," Idaho said.
    Paul bent his head, listening. He no longer could hear the mourners. He thought of the ancient Fremen rite being performed now deep in the sietch, far down in the room of the death-still where the tribe recovered its water.
    "There was no choice," Paul said. "You understand that, Duncan?" 
    "I understand."
    "There are some things no one can bear. I meddled in all the possible futures I could create until, finally, they created me." 
    "M'Lord, you shouldn't . . ."
    "There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers," Paul said. "Nothing. Nothing can be done."
    As he spoke, Paul felt his link with the vision shatter. His mind cowered, overwhelmed by infinite possibilities. His lost vision became like the wind, blowing where it willed.

= = = = = =

We say of Muad'dib that he has gone on a journey into that land where we walk without footprints.
-Preamble to the Qizarate Creed

    There was a dike of water against the sand, an outer limit for the plantings of the sietch holding. A rock bridge came next and then the open desert beneath Idaho's feet. The promontory of Sietch Tabr dominated the night sky behind him. The light of both moons frosted its high rim. An orchard had been brought right down to the water.
    Idaho paused on the desert side and stared back at flowered branches over silent water -- reflections and reality -- four moons. The stillsuit felt greasy against his skin. Wet flint odors invaded his nostrils past the filters. There was a malignant simpering to the wind through the orchard. He listened for night sounds. Kangaroo mice inhabited the grass at the water verge; a hawk owl bounced its droning call into the cliff shadows; the wind-broken hiss of a sandfall came from the open bled. 
    Idaho turned toward the sound.
    He could see no movement out there on the moonlit dunes.
    It was Tandis who had brought Paul this far. Then the man had returned to tell his account. And Paul had walked out into the desert -- like a Fremen.
    "He was blind -- truly blind," Tandis had said, as though that explained it. "Before that, he had the vision which he told to us . . . but . . . "
    A shrug. Blind Fremen were abandoned in the desert. Muad'dib might be Emperor, but he was also Fremen. Had he not made provision that Fremen guard and raise his children? He was Fremen.
    It was a skeleton desert here, Idaho saw. Moon-silvered ribs of rock showed through the sand; then the dunes began.
    I should not have left him alone, not even for a minute, Idaho thought. I knew what was in his mind.
    "He told me the future no longer needed his physical presence," Tandis had reported. "When he left me. He called back. 'Now I am free' were his words." 
    Damn them! Idaho thought.
    The Fremen had refused to send 'thopters or searchers of any kind. Rescue was against their ancient customs.
    "There will be a worm for Muad'dib," they said. And they began the chant for those committed to the desert, the ones whose water went to Shai-hulud: "Mother of sand, father of Time, beginning of Life, grant him passage."
    Idaho seated himself on a flat rock and stared at the desert. The night out there was filled with camouflage patterns. There was no way to tell where Paul had gone. 
    "Now I am free."
    Idaho spoke the words aloud, surprised by the sound of his own voice. For a time, he let his mind run, remembering a day when he'd taken the child Paul to the sea market on Caladan, the dazzling glare of a sun on water, the sea's riches brought up dead, there to be sold. Idaho remembered Gurney Halleck playing music of the baliset for them -- pleasure, laughter. Rhythms pranced in his awareness, leading his mind like a thrall down channels of remembered delight.
    Gurney Halleck. Gurney would blame him for this tragedy.
    Memory music faded.
    He recalled Paul's words: "There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers."
    Idaho began to wonder how Paul would die out there in the desert. Quickly, killed by a worm? Slowly, in the sun? Some of the Fremen back there in the sietch had said Muad'dib would never die, that he had entered the ruh-world where all possible futures existed, that he would be present henceforth in the alam al-mythal, wandering there endlessly even after his flesh had ceased to be.
    He'll die and I'm powerless to prevent it, Idaho thought.
    He began to realize that there might be a certain fastidious courtesy in dying without a trace -- no remains, nothing, and an entire planet for a tomb. 
    Mentat, solve thyself, he thought.
    Words intruded on his memory -- the ritual words of the Fedaykin lieutenant, posting a guard over Muad'dib's children: "It shall be the solemn duty of the officer in charge . . . "
    The plodding, self-important language of government enraged him. It had seduced the Fremen. It had seduced everyone. A man, a great man, was dying out there, but language plodded on . . . and on . . . and on . . .
    What had happened, he wondered, to all the clean meanings that screened out nonsense? Somewhere, in some lost where which the Imperium had created, they'd been walled off, sealed against chance rediscovery. His mind quested for solutions, mentat fashion. Patterns of knowledge glistened there. Lorelei hair might shimmer thus, beckoning . . . beckoning the enchanted seaman into emerald caverns . . . 
    With an abrupt start, Idaho drew back from catatonic forgetfulness.
    So! he thought. Rather than face my failure, I would disappear within myself!
    The instant of that almost-plunge remained in his memory. Examining it, he felt his life stretch out as long as the existence of the universe. Real flesh lay condensed, finite in its emerald cavern of awareness, but infinite life had shared his being.
    Idaho stood up, feeling cleansed by the desert. Sand was beginning to chatter in the wind, pecking at the surfaces of leaves in the orchard behind him. There was the dry and abrasive smell of dust in the night air. His robe whipped to the pulse of a sudden gust.
    Somewhere far out in the bled, Idaho realized, a mother storm raged, lifting vortices of winding dust in hissing violence -- a giant worm of sand powerful enough to cut flesh from bones.
    He will become one with the desert, Idaho thought. The desert will fulfill him.
    It was a Zensunni thought washing through his mind like clear water. Paul would go on marching out there, he knew. An Atreides would not give himself up completely to destiny, not even in the full awareness of the inevitable.
    A touch of prescience came over Idaho then, and he saw that people of the future would speak of Paul in terms of seas. Despite a life soaked in dust, water would follow him. "His flesh foundered," they would say, "but he swam on." 
    Behind Idaho, a man cleared his throat.
    Idaho turned to discern the figure of Stilgar standing on the bridge over the qanat.
    "He will not be found," Stilgar said. "Yet all men will find him."
    "The desert takes him -- and deifies him," Idaho said. "Yet he was an interloper here. He brought an alien chemistry to this planet -- water."
    "The desert imposes its own rhythms," Stilgar said. "We welcomed him, called him our Mahdi, our Muad'dib, and gave him his secret name. Base of the Pillar: Usul." 
    "Still he was not born a Fremen."
    "And that does not change the fact that we claimed him . . . and have claimed him finally." Stilgar put a hand on Idaho's shoulder. "All men are interlopers, old friend." 
    "You're a deep one, aren't you, Stil?"
    "Deep enough. I can see how we clutter the universe with our migrations. Muad'dib gave us something uncluttered. Men will remember his Jihad for that, at least."
    "He won't give up to the desert," Idaho said. "He's blind, but he won't give up. He's a man of honor and principle. He was Atreides-trained."
    "And his water will be poured on the sand," Stilgar said. "Come." He pulled gently at Idaho's arm. "Alia is back and is asking for you." 
    "She was with you at Sietch Makab?"
    "Yes -- she helped whip those soft Naibs into line. They take her orders now . . . as I do." 
    "What orders?" 
    "She commanded the execution of the traitors." 
    "Oh." Idaho suppressed a feeling of vertigo as he looked up at the promontory. "Which traitors?"
    "The Guildsman, the Reverend Mother Mohiam, Korba . . . a few others." 
    "You slew a Reverend Mother?"
    "I did. Muad'dib left word that it should not be done." He shrugged. "But I disobeyed him, as Alia knew I would."
    Idaho stared again into the desert, feeling himself become whole, one person capable of seeing the pattern of what Paul had created. Judgment strategy, the Atreides called it in their training manuals. People are subordinate to government, but the ruled influence the rulers. Did the ruled have any concept, he wondered, of what they had helped create here?
    "Alia . . . " Stilgar said, clearing his throat. He sounded embarrassed. "She needs the comfort of your presence." 
    "And she is the government," Idaho murmured. 
    "A regency, no more."
    "Fortune passes everywhere, as her father often said," Idaho muttered.
    "We make our bargain with the future," Stilgar said. "Will you come now? We need you back there." Again, he sounded embarrassed. "She is . . . distraught. She cries out against her brother one moment, mourns him the next." 
    "Presently," Idaho promised. He heard Stilgar leave. He stood facing into the rising wind, letting the grains of sand rattle against the stillsuit.
    Mentat awareness projected the outflowing patterns into the future. The possibilities dazzled him. Paul had set in motion a whirling vortex and nothing could stand in its path.
    The Bene Tleilax and the Guild had overplayed their hands and had lost, were discredited. The Qizarate was shaken by the treason of Korba and others high within it. And Paul's final voluntary act, his ultimate acceptance of their customs, had ensured the loyalty of the Fremen to him and to his house. He was one of them forever now.
    "Paul is gone!" Alia's voice was choked. She had come up almost silently to where Idaho stood and was now beside him. "He was a fool, Duncan!" 
    "Don't say that!" he snapped.
    "The whole universe will say it before I'm through," she said.
    "Why, for the love of heaven?" 
    "For the love of my brother, not of heaven." 
    Zensunni insight dilated his awareness. He could sense that there was no vision in her -- had been none since Chani's death. "You practice an odd love," he said.
    "Love? Duncan, he had but to step off the track! What matter that the rest of the universe would have come shattering down behind him? He'd have been safe . . . and Chani with him!" 
    "Then . . . why didn't he?"
    "For the love of heaven," she whispered. Then, more loudly, she said: "Paul's entire life was a struggle to escape his Jihad and its deification. At least, he's free of it. He chose this!"
    "Ah, yes -- the oracle." Idaho shook his head in wonder. "Even Chani's death. His moon fell." 
    "He was a fool, wasn't he, Duncan?" 
    Idaho's throat tightened with suppressed grief.
    "Such a fool!" Alia gasped her control breaking. "He'll live forever while we must die!" 
    "Alia, don't . . . "
    "It's just grief," she said, voice low. "Just grief. Do you know what I must do for him? I must save the life of the Princess Irulan. That one! You should hear her grief. Wailing, giving moisture to the dead; she swears she loved him and knew it not. She reviles her Sisterhood, says she'll spend her life teaching Paul's children." 
    "You trust her?"
    "She reeks of trustworthiness!"
    "Ahhh," Idaho murmured. The final pattern unreeled before his awareness like a design on fabric. The defection of the Princess Irulan was the last step. It left the Bene Gesserit with no remaining lever against the Atreides heirs.
    Alia began to sob, leaned against him, face pressed into his chest. "Ohhh, Duncan, Duncan! He's gone!" 
    Idaho put his lips against her hair. "Please," he whispered. He felt her grief mingling with his like two streams entering the same pool.
    "I need you, Duncan," she sobbed. "Love me!" 
    "I do," he whispered.
    She lifted her head, peered at the moon-frosted outline of his face. "I know, Duncan. Love knows love."
    Her words sent a shudder through him, a feeling of estrangement from his old self. He had come out here looking for one thing and had found another. It was as though he'd lurched into a room full of familiar people only to realize too late that he knew none of them.
    She pushed away from him, took his hand. "Will you come with me, Duncan?" 
    "Wherever you lead," he said.
    She led him back across the qanat into the darkness at the base of the massif and its Place of Safety.


Epilogue

No bitter stench of funeral-still for Muad'dib. 
No knell nor solemn rite to free the mind 
From avaricious shadows. 
He is the fool saint, 
The golden stranger living forever 
On the edge of reason.
Let your guard fall and he is there! 
His crimson peace and sovereign pallor 
Strike into our universe on prophetic webs 
To the verge, of a quiet glance -- there! 
Out of bristling star-jungles:
Mysterious, lethal, an oracle without eyes, 
Catspaw of prophecy, whose voice never dies! 
Shai-hulud, he awaits thee upon a strand 
Where couples walk and fix, eye to eye, 
The delicious ennui of love.
He strides through the long cavern of time, 
Scattering the fool-self of his dream.
-The Ghola's HymnDune
Frank Herbert

Copyright 1965

Book 1
DUNE

= = = = = = 

A beginning is the time for taking the most delicate care that the balances are correct. This every sister of the Bene Gesserit knows. To begin your study of the life of Muad'Dib, then, take care that you first place him in his time: born in the 57th year of the Padishah Emperor, Shaddam IV. And take the most special care that you locate Muad'Dib in his place: the planet Arrakis. Do not be deceived by the fact that he was born on Caladan and lived his first fifteen years there. Arrakis, the planet known as Dune, is forever his place.
-from "Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    In the week before their departure to Arrakis, when all the final scurrying about had reached a nearly unbearable frenzy, an old crone came to visit the mother of the boy, Paul.
    It was a warm night at Castle Caladan, and the ancient pile of stone that had served the Atreides family as home for twenty-six generations bore that cooled-sweat feeling it acquired before a change in the weather.
    The old woman was let in by the side door down the vaulted passage by Paul's room and she was allowed a moment to peer in at him where he lay in his bed.
    By the half-light of a suspensor lamp, dimmed and hanging near the floor, the awakened boy could see a bulky female shape at his door, standing one step ahead of his mother. The old woman was a witch shadow -- hair like matted spiderwebs, hooded 'round darkness of features, eyes like glittering jewels.
    "Is he not small for his age, Jessica?" the old woman asked. Her voice wheezed and twanged like an untuned baliset.
    Paul's mother answered in her soft contralto: "The Atreides are known to start late getting their growth, Your Reverence." 
    "So I've heard, so I've heard," wheezed the old woman. "Yet he's already fifteen." 
    "Yes, Your Reverence."
    "He's awake and listening to us," said the old woman. "Sly little rascal." She chuckled. "But royalty has need of slyness. And if he's really the Kwisatz Haderach . . . well . . ." 
    Within the shadows of his bed, Paul held his eyes open to mere slits. Two bird-bright ovals -- the eyes of the old woman -- seemed to expand and glow as they stared into his.
    "Sleep well, you sly little rascal," said the old woman. "Tomorrow you'll need all your faculties to meet my gom jabbar." 
    And she was gone, pushing his mother out, closing the door with a solid thump.
    Paul lay awake wondering: What's a gom jabbar?
    In all the upset during this time of change, the old woman was the strangest thing he had seen. 
    Your Reverence.
    And the way she called his mother Jessica like a common serving wench instead of what she was -- a Bene Gesserit Lady, a duke's concubine and mother of the ducal heir.
    Is a gom jabbar something of Arrakis I must know before we go there? he wondered.
    He mouthed her strange words: Gom jabbar . . . Kwisatz Haderach.
    There had been so many things to learn. Arrakis would be a place so different from Caladan that Paul's mind whirled with the new knowledge. Arrakis -- Dune -- Desert Planet.
    Thufir Hawat, his father's Master of Assassins, had explained it: their mortal enemies, the Harkonnens, had been on Arrakis eighty years, holding the planet in quasi-fief under a CHOAM Company contract to mine the geriatric spice, melange. Now the Harkonnens were leaving to be replaced by the House of Atreides in fief-complete -- an apparent victory for the Duke Leto. Yet, Hawat had said, this appearance contained the deadliest peril, for the Duke Leto was popular among the Great Houses of the Landsraad.
    "A popular man arouses the jealousy of the powerful," Hawat had said.
    Arrakis -- Dune -- Desert Planet.
    Paul fell asleep to dream of an Arrakeen cavern, silent people all around him moving in the dim light of glowglobes. It was solemn there and like a cathedral as he listened to a faint sound -- the drip-drip-drip of water. Even while he remained in the dream, Paul knew he would remember it upon awakening. He always remembered the dreams that were predictions. 
    The dream faded.
    Paul awoke to feel himself in the warmth of his bed -- thinking . . . thinking. This world of Castle Caladan, without play or companions his own age, perhaps did not deserve sadness in farewell. Dr. Yueh, his teacher, had hinted that the faufreluches class system was not rigidly guarded on Arrakis. The planet sheltered people who lived at the desert edge without caid or bashar to command them: will-o'-the-sand people called Fremen, marked down on no census of the Imperial Regate. 
    Arrakis -- Dune -- Desert Planet.
    Paul sensed his own tensions, decided to practice one of the mind-body lessons his mother had taught him. Three quick breaths triggered the responses: he fell into the floating awareness . . . focusing the consciousness . . . aortal dilation . . . avoiding the unfocused mechanism of consciousness . . . to be conscious by choice . . . blood enriched and swift-flooding the overload regions . . . one does not obtain food-safety-freedom by instinct alone . . . animal consciousness does not extend beyond the given moment nor into the idea that its victims may become extinct . . . the animal destroys and does not produce . . . animal pleasures remain close to sensation levels and avoid the perceptual . . . the human requires a background grid through which to see his universe . . . focused consciousness by choice, this forms your grid . . . bodily integrity follows nerve-blood flow according to the deepest awareness of cell needs . . . all things/cells/beings are impermanent . . . strive for flow-permanence within . . . 
    Over and over and over within Paul's floating awareness the lesson rolled.
    When dawn touched Paul's window sill with yellow light, he sensed it through closed eyelids, opened them, hearing then the renewed bustle and hurry in the castle, seeing the familiar patterned beams of his bedroom ceiling.
    The hall door opened and his mother peered in, hair like shaded bronze held with a black ribbon at the crown, her oval face emotionless and green eyes staring solemnly. 
    "You're awake," she said. "Did you sleep well?" 
    "Yes."
    He studied the tallness of her, saw the hint of tension in her shoulders as she chose clothing for him from the closet racks. Another might have missed the tension, but she had trained him in the Bene Gesserit Way -- in the minutiae of observation. She turned, holding a semiformal jacket for him. It carried the red Atreides hawk crest above the breast pocket.
    "Hurry and dress," she said. "Reverend Mother is waiting." 
    "I dreamed of her once," Paul said. "Who is she?" 
    "She was my teacher at the Bene Gesserit school. Now, she's the Emperor's Truthsayer. And Paul . . . " She hesitated. "You must tell her about your dreams."
    "I will. Is she the reason we got Arrakis?"
    "We did not get Arrakis." Jessica flicked dust from a pair of trousers, hung them with the jacket on the dressing stand beside his bed. "Don't keep Reverend Mother waiting." 
    Paul sat up, hugged his knees. "What's a gom jabbar?" 
    Again, the training she had given him exposed her almost invisible hesitation, a nervous betrayal he felt as fear.
    Jessica crossed to the window, flung wide the draperies, stared across the river orchards toward Mount Syubi. "You'll learn about . . . the gom jabbar soon enough," she said. 
    He heard the fear in her voice and wondered at it.
    Jessica spoke without turning. "Reverend Mother is waiting in my morning room. Please hurry."

    The Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam sat in a tapestried chair watching mother and son approach. Windows on each side of her overlooked the curving southern bend of the river and the green farmlands of the Atreides family holding, but the Reverend Mother ignored the view. She was feeling her age this morning, more than a little petulant. She blamed it on space travel and association with that abominable Spacing Guild and its secretive ways. But here was a mission that required personal attention from a Bene Gesserit-with-the-Sight. Even the Padishah Emperor's Truthsayer couldn't evade that responsibility when the duty call came.
    Damn that Jessica! the Reverend Mother thought. If only she 'd borne us a girl as she was ordered to do!
    Jessica stopped three paces from the chair, dropped a small curtsy, a gentle flick of left hand along the line of her skirt. Paul gave the short bow his dancing master had taught -- the one used "when in doubt of another's station."
    The nuances of Paul's greeting were not lost on the Reverend Mother. She said: "He's a cautious one, Jessica." 
    Jessica's hand went to Paul's shoulder, tightened there. For a heartbeat, fear pulsed through her palm. Then she had herself under control. "Thus he has been taught, Your Reverence." 
    What does she fear? Paul wondered.
    The old woman studied Paul in one gestalten flicker: face oval like Jessica's, but strong bones . . . hair: the Duke's black-black but with browline of the maternal grandfather who cannot be named, and that thin, disdainful nose; shape of directly staring green eyes: like the old Duke, the paternal grandfather who is dead.
    Now, there was a man who appreciated the power of bravura -- even in death, the Reverend Mother thought.
    "Teaching is one thing," she said, "the basic ingredient is another. We shall see." The old eyes darted a hard glance at Jessica. "Leave us. I enjoin you to practice the meditation of peace."
    Jessica took her hand from Paul's shoulder. "Your Reverence, I --" 
    "Jessica, you know it must be done." 
    Paul looked up at his mother, puzzled. 
    Jessica straightened. "Yes . . . of course."
    Paul looked back at the Reverend Mother. Politeness and his mother's obvious awe of this old woman argued caution. Yet he felt an angry apprehension at the fear he sensed radiating from his mother.
    "Paul . . . " Jessica took a deep breath. ". . . this test you're about to receive . . . it's important to me." 
    "Test?" He looked up at her.
    "Remember that you're a duke's son, "Jessica said. She whirled and strode from the room in a dry swishing of skirt. The door closed solidly behind her.
    Paul faced the old woman, holding anger in check. "Does one dismiss the Lady Jessica as though she were a serving wench?" 
    A smile flicked the corners of the wrinkled old mouth. "The Lady Jessica was my serving wench, lad, for fourteen years at school." She nodded. "And a good one, too. Now, you come here!"
    The command whipped out at him. Paul found himself obeying before he could think about it. Using the Voice on me, he thought. He stopped at her gesture, standing beside her knees.
    "See this?" she asked. From the folds of her gown, she lifted a green metal cube about fifteen centimeters on a side. She turned it and Paul saw that one side was open -- black and oddly frightening. No light penetrated that open blackness. 
    "Put your right hand in the box," she said.
    Fear shot through Paul. He started to back away, but the old woman said: "Is this how you obey your mother?" 
    He looked up into bird-bright eyes.
    Slowly, feeling the compulsions and unable to inhibit them, Paul put his hand into the box. He felt first a sense of cold as the blackness closed around his hand, then slick metal against his fingers and a prickling as though his hand were asleep.
    A predatory look filled the old woman's features. She lifted her right hand away from the box and poised the hand close to the side of Paul's neck. He saw a glint of metal there and started to turn toward
    "Stop!" she snapped.
    Using the Voice again! He swung his attention back to her face.
    "I hold at your neck the gom jabbar," she said. "The gom jabbar, the high-handed enemy. It's a needle with a drop of poison on its tip. Ah-ah! Don't pull away or you'll feel that poison." 
    Paul tried to swallow in a dry throat. He could not take his attention from the seamed old face, the glistening eyes, the pale gums around silvery metal teeth that flashed as she spoke.
    "A duke's son must know about poisons," she said. "It's the way of our times, eh? Musky, to be poisoned in your drink. Aumas, to be poisoned in your food. The quick ones and the slow ones and the ones in between. Here's a new one for you: the gom jabbar. It kills only animals."
    Pride overcame Paul's fear. "You dare suggest a duke's son is an animal?" he demanded.
    "Let us say I suggest you may be human," she said. "Steady! I warn you not to try jerking away. I am old, but my hand can drive this needle into your neck before you escape me." 
    "Who are you?" he whispered. "How did you trick my mother into leaving me alone with you? Are you from the Harkonnens?" 
    "The Harkonnens? Bless us, no! Now, be silent." A dry finger touched his neck and he stilled the involuntary urge to leap away.
    "Good," she said. "You pass the first test. Now, here's the way of the rest of it: If you withdraw your hand from the box you die. This is the only rule. Keep your hand in the box and live. Withdraw it and die."
    Paul took a deep breath to still his trembling. "If I call out there'll be servants on you in seconds and you'll die."
    "Servants will not pass your mother who stands guard outside that door. Depend on it. Your mother survived this test. Now it's your turn. Be honored. We seldom administer this to men-children."
    Curiosity reduced Paul's fear to a manageable level. He heard truth in the old woman's voice, no denying it. If his mother stood guard out there . . . if this were truly a test . . . And whatever it was, he knew himself caught in it, trapped by that hand at his neck: the gom jabbar. He recalled the response from the Litany against Fear as his mother had taught him out of the Bene Gesserit rite.
    "I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain."
    He felt calmness return, said: "Get on with it, old woman." 
    "Old woman!" she snapped. "You've courage, and that can't be denied. Well, we shall see, sirra." She bent close, lowered her voice almost to a whisper. "You will feel pain in this hand within the box. Pain. But! Withdraw the hand and I'll touch your neck with my gom jabbar -- the death so swift it's like the fall of the headsman's axe. Withdraw your hand and the gom jabbar takes you. Understand?" 
    "What's in the box?" 
    "Pain."
    He felt increased tingling in his hand, pressed his lips tightly together. How could this be a test? he wondered. The tingling became an itch.
    The old woman said; "You've heard of animals chewing off a leg to escape a trap? There's an animal kind of trick. A human would remain in the trap, endure the pain, feigning death that he might kill the trapper and remove a threat to his kind."
    The itch became the faintest burning. "Why are you doing this?" he demanded.
    "To determine if you're human. Be silent."
    Paul clenched his left hand into a fist as the burning sensation increased in the other hand. It mounted slowly: heat upon heat upon heat . . . upon heat. He felt the fingernails of his free hand biting the palm. He tried to flex the fingers of the burning hand, but couldn't move them.
    "It burns," he whispered. 
    "Silence!"
    Pain throbbed up his arm. Sweat stood out on his forehead. Every fiber cried out to withdraw the hand from that burning pit . . . but . . . the gom jabbar. Without turning his head, he tried to move his eyes to see that terrible needle poised beside his neck. He sensed that he was breathing in gasps, tried to slow his breaths and couldn't. 
    Pain!
    His world emptied of everything except that hand immersed in agony, the ancient face inches away staring at him. 
    His lips were so dry he had difficulty separating them. 
    The burning! The burning!
    He thought he could feel skin curling black on that agonized hand, the flesh crisping and dropping away until only charred bones remained.
    It stopped!
    As though a switch had been turned off, the pain stopped.
    Paul felt his right arm trembling, felt sweat bathing his body.
    "Enough," the old woman muttered. "Kull wahad! No woman child ever withstood that much. I must've wanted you to fail." She leaned back, withdrawing the gom jabbar from the side of his neck. "Take your hand from the box, young human, and look at it." 
    He fought down an aching shiver, stared at the lightless void where his hand seemed to remain of its own volition. Memory of pain inhibited every movement. Reason told him he would withdraw a blackened stump from that box. 
    "Do it!" she snapped.
    He jerked his hand from the box, stared at it astonished. Not a mark. No sign of agony on the flesh. He held up the hand, turned it, flexed the fingers.
    "Pain by nerve induction," she said. "Can't go around maiming potential humans. There're those who'd give a pretty for the secret of this box, though." She slipped it into the folds of her gown.
    "But the pain --" he said.
    "Pain," she sniffed. "A human can override any nerve in the body."
    Paul felt his left hand aching, uncurled the clenched fingers, looked at four bloody marks where fingernails had bitten his palm. He dropped the hand to his side, looked at the old woman. "You did that to my mother once?" 
    "Ever sift sand through a screen?" she asked.
    The tangential slash of her question shocked his mind into a higher awareness: Sand through a screen, he nodded. 
    "We Bene Gesserit sift people to find the humans." 
    He lifted his right hand, willing the memory of the pain. "And that's all there is to it -- pain?"
    "I observed you in pain, lad. Pain's merely the axis of the test. Your mother's told you about our ways of observing. I see the signs of her teaching in you. Our test is crisis and observation." 
    He heard the confirmation in her voice, said: "It's truth!" 
    She stared at him. He senses truth! Could he be the one? Could he truly be the one? She extinguished the excitement, reminding herself: "Hope clouds observation." 
    "You know when people believe what they say," she said. 
    "I know it."
    The harmonics of ability confirmed by repeated test were in his voice. She heard them, said: "Perhaps you are the Kwisatz Haderach. Sit down, little brother, here at my feet." 
    "I prefer to stand."
    "Your mother sat at my feet once." 
    "I'm not my mother."
    "You hate us a little, eh?" She looked toward the door, called out: "Jessica!"
    The door flew open and Jessica stood there staring hard-eyed into the room. Hardness melted from her as she saw Paul. She managed a faint smile.
    "Jessica, have you ever stopped hating me?" the old woman asked.
    "I both love and hate you," Jessica said. "The hate -- that's from pains I must never forget. The love -- that's . . . " 
    "Just the basic fact," the old woman said, but her voice was gentle. "You may come in now, but remain silent. Close that door and mind it that no one interrupts us."
    Jessica stepped into the room, closed the door and stood with her back to it. My son lives, she thought. My son lives and is . . . human. I knew he was . . . but . . . he lives. Now, I can go on living. The door felt hard and real against her back. Everything in the room was immediate and pressing against her senses. 
    My son lives.
    Paul looked at his mother. She told the truth. He wanted to get away alone and think this experience through, but knew he could not leave until he was dismissed. The old woman had gained a power over him. They spoke truth. His mother had undergone this test. There must be terrible purpose in it . . . the pain and fear had been terrible. He understood terrible purposes. They drove against all odds. They were their own necessity. Paul felt that he had been infected with terrible purpose. He did not know yet what the terrible purpose was.
    "Some day, lad," the old woman said, "you, too, may have to stand outside a door like that. It takes a measure of doing." 
    Paul looked down at the hand that had known pain, then up to the Reverend Mother. The sound of her voice had contained a difference then from any other voice in his experience. The words were outlined in brilliance. There was an edge to them. He felt that any question he might ask her would bring an answer that could lift him out of his flesh-world into something greater. 
    "Why do you test for humans?" he asked. 
    "To set you free." 
    "Free?"
    "Once men turned their thinking over to machines in the hope that this would set them free. But that only permitted other men with machines to enslave them."
    " 'Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a man's mind,' " Paul quoted.
    "Right out of the Butlerian Jihad and the Orange Catholic Bible," she said. "But what the O.C. Bible should've said is: 'Thou shalt not make a machine to counterfeit a human mind.' Have you studied the Mentat in your service?" 
    "I've studied with Thufir Hawat."
    "The Great Revolt took away a crutch," she said. "It forced human minds to develop. Schools were started to train human talents. " 
    "Bene Gesserit schools?"
    She nodded. "We have two chief survivors of those ancient schools: the Bene Gesserit and the Spacing Guild. The Guild, so we think, emphasizes almost pure mathematics. Bene Gesserit performs another function." 
    "Politics," he said.
    "Kull wahad!" the old woman said. She sent a hard glance at Jessica.
    "I've not told him. Your Reverence," Jessica said.
    The Reverend Mother returned her attention to Paul. "You did that on remarkably few clues," she said. "Politics indeed. The original Bene Gesserit school was directed by those who saw the need of a thread of continuity in human affairs. They saw there could be no such continuity without separating human stock from animal stock -- for breeding purposes."
    The old woman's words abruptly lost their special sharpness for Paul. He felt an offense against what his mother called his instinct for rightness. It wasn't that Reverend Mother lied to him. She obviously believed what she said. It was something deeper, something tied to his terrible purpose.
    He said: "But my mother tells me many Bene Gesserit of the schools don't know their ancestry."
    "The genetic lines are always in our records," she said. "Your mother knows that either she's of Bene Gesserit descent or her stock was acceptable in itself." 
    "Then why couldn't she know who her parents are?" 
    "Some do . . . Many don't. We might, for example, have wanted to breed her to a close relative to set up a dominant in some genetic trait. We have many reasons."
    Again, Paul felt the offense against rightness. He said: "You take a lot on yourselves."
    The Reverend Mother stared at him, wondering: Did I hear criticism in his voice? "We carry a heavy burden," she said.
    Paul felt himself coming more and more out of the shock of the test. He leveled a measuring stare at her, said: "You say maybe I'm the . . . Kwisatz Haderach. What's that, a human gom jabbar?" 
    "Paul," Jessica said. "You mustn't take that tone with --" 
    "I'll handle this, Jessica," the old woman said. "Now, lad, do you know about the Truthsayer drug?"
    "You take it to improve your ability to detect falsehood," he said. "My mother's told me." 
    "Have you ever seen truthtrance?" 
    He shook his head. "No."
    "The drug's dangerous," she said, "but it gives insight. When a Truthsayer's gifted by the drug, she can look many places in her memory -- in her body's memory. We look down so many avenues of the past . . . but only feminine avenues." Her voice took on a note of sadness. "Yet, there's a place where no Truthsayer can see. We are repelled by it, terrorized. It is said a man will come one day and find in the gift of the drug his inward eye. He will look where we cannot -- into both feminine and masculine pasts." 
    "Your Kwisatz Haderach?"
    "Yes, the one who can be many places at once: the Kwisatz Haderach. Many men have tried the drug . . . so many, but none has succeeded." 
    "They tried and failed, all of them?" 
    "Oh, no." She shook her head. "They tried and died."

= = = = = =

To attempt an understanding of Muad'Dib without understanding his mortal enemies, the Harkonnens, is to attempt seeing Truth without knowing Falsehood. It is the attempt to see the Light without knowing Darkness. It cannot be.
-from "Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    It was a relief globe of a world, partly in shadows, spinning under the impetus of a fat hand that glittered with rings. The globe sat on a freeform stand at one wall of a windowless room whose other walls presented a patchwork of multicolored scrolls, filmbooks, tapes and reels. Light glowed in the room from golden balls hanging in mobile suspensor fields.
    An ellipsoid desk with a top of jade-pink petrified elacca wood stood at the center of the room. Veriform suspensor chairs ringed it, two of them occupied. In one sat a dark-haired youth of about sixteen years, round of face and with sullen eyes. The other held a slender, short man with effeminate face.
    Both youth and man stared at the globe and the man half-hidden in shadows spinning it.
    A chuckle sounded beside the globe. A basso voice rumbled out of the chuckle: "There it is, Piter -- the biggest mantrap in all history. And the Duke's headed into its jaws. Is it not a magnificent thing that I, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, do?" 
    "Assuredly, Baron," said the man. His voice came out tenor with a sweet, musical quality.
    The fat hand descended onto the globe, stopped the spinning. Now, all eyes in the room could focus on the motionless surface and see that it was the kind of globe made for wealthy collectors or planetary governors of the Empire. It had the stamp of Imperial handicraft about it. Latitude and longitude lines were laid in with hair-fine platinum wire. The polar caps were insets of finest cloud-milk diamonds.
    The fat hand moved, tracing details on the surface. "I invite you to observe," the basso voice rumbled. "Observe closely, Piter, and you, too, Feyd-Rautha, my darling: from sixty degrees north to seventy degrees south -- these exquisite ripples. Their coloring: does it not remind you of sweet caramels? And nowhere do you see blue of lakes or rivers or seas. And these lovely polar caps -- so small. Could anyone mistake this place? Arrakis! Truly unique. A superb setting for a unique Victory."
    A smile touched Piter's lips. "And to think. Baron: the Padishah Emperor believes he's given the Duke your spice planet. How poignant."
    "That's a nonsensical statement," the Baron rumbled. "You say this to confuse young Feyd-Rautha, but it is not necessary to confuse my nephew."
    The sullen-faced youth stirred in his chair, smoothed a wrinkle in the black leotards he wore. He sat upright as a discreet tapping sounded at the door in the wall behind him.
    Piter unfolded from his chair, crossed to the door, cracked it wide enough to accept a message cylinder. He closed the door, unrolled the cylinder and scanned it. A chuckle sounded from him. Another.
    "Well?" the Baron demanded.
    "The fool answered us, Baron!"
    "Whenever did an Atreides refuse the opportunity for a gesture?" the Baron asked. "Well, what does he say?" 
    "He's most uncouth, Baron. Addresses you as 'Harkonnen' -- no 'Sire et Cher Cousin,' no title, nothing."
    "It's a good name," the Baron growled, and his voice betrayed his impatience. "What does dear Leto say?"
    "He says: 'Your offer of a meeting is refused. I have ofttimes met your treachery and this all men know.' " 
    "And?" the Baron asked.
    "He says: 'The art of kanly still has admirers in the Empire.' He signs it: 'Duke Leto of Arrakis.' " Piter began to laugh. "Of Arrakis! Oh, my! This is almost too rich!"
    "Be silent, Piter," the Baron said, and the laughter stopped as though shut off with a switch. "Kanly, is it?" the Baron asked. "Vendetta, heh? And he uses the nice old word so rich in tradition to be sure I know he means it."
    "You made the peace gesture," Piter said. "The forms have been obeyed."
    "For a Mentat, you talk too much, Piter," the Baron said. And he thought: I must do away with that one soon. He has almost outlived his usefulness. The Baron stared across the room at his Mental assassin, seeing the feature about him that most people noticed first: the eyes, the shaded slits of blue within blue, the eyes without any white in them at all.
    A grin flashed across Piter's face. It was like a mask grimace beneath those eyes like holes. "But, Baron! Never has revenge been more beautiful. It is to see a plan of the most exquisite treachery: to make Leto exchange Caladan for Dune -- and without alternative because the Emperor orders it. How waggish of you!" 
    In a cold voice, the Baron said: "You have a flux of the mouth, Piter."
    "But I am happy, my Baron. Whereas you . . . you are touched by jealousy." 
    "Piter!"
    "Ah-ah. Baron! Is it not regrettable you were unable to devise this delicious scheme by yourself?"
    "Someday I will have you strangled, Piter." 
    "Of a certainty, Baron. Enfin! But a kind act is never lost, eh?" 
    "Have you been chewing verite or semuta, Piter?" 
    "Truth without fear surprises the Baron," Piter said. His face drew down into a caricature of a frowning mask. "Ah, hah! But you see, Baron, I know as a Mentat when you will send the executioner. You will hold back just so long as I am useful. To move sooner would be wasteful and I'm yet of much use. I know what it is you learned from that lovely Dune planet -- waste not. True, Baron?" 
    The Baron continued to stare at Piter.
    Feyd-Rautha squirmed in his chair. These wrangling fools! he thought. My uncle cannot talk to his Mental without arguing. Do they think I've nothing to do except listen their arguments?
    "Feyd," the Baron said. "I told you to listen and learn when I invited you in here. Are you learning?" 
    "Yes, Uncle." the voice was carefully subservient.
    "Sometimes I wonder about Piter," the Baron said. "I cause pain out of necessity, but he . . . I swear he takes a positive delight in it. For myself, I can feel pity toward the poor Duke Leto. Dr. Yueh will move against him soon, and that'll be the end of all the Atreides. But surely Leto will know whose hand directed the pliant doctor . . . and knowing that will be a terrible thing." 
    "Then why haven't you directed the doctor to slip a kindjal between his ribs quietly and efficiently?" Piter asked. "You talk of pity, but --"
    "The Duke must know when I encompass his doom," the Baron said. "And the other Great Houses must learn of it. The knowledge will give them pause. I'll gain a bit more room to maneuver. The necessity is obvious, but I don't have to like it."
    "Room to maneuver," Piter sneered. "Already you have the Emperor's eyes on you, Baron. You move too boldly. One day the Emperor will send a legion or two of his Sardaukar down here onto Giedi Prime and that'll be an end to the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen."
    "You'd like to see that, wouldn't you, Piter?" the Baron asked. "You'd enjoy seeing the Corps of Sardaukar pillage through my cities and sack this castle. You'd truly enjoy that." 
    "Does the Baron need to ask?" Piter whispered.
    "You should've been a Bashar of the Corps," the Baron said. "You're too interested in blood and pain. Perhaps I was too quick with my promise of the spoils of Arrakis."
    Piter took five curiously mincing steps into the room, stopped directly behind Feyd-Rautha. There was a tight air of tension in the room, and the youth looked up at Piter with a worried frown.
    "Do not toy with Piter, Baron," Piter said. "You promised me the Lady Jessica. You promised her to me." 
    "For what, Piter?" the Baron asked. "For pain?" 
    Piter stared at him, dragging out the silence.
    Feyd-Rautha moved his suspensor chair to one side, said: "Uncle, do I have to stay? You said you'd --"
    "My darling Feyd-Rautha grows impatient," the Baron said. He moved within the shadows beside the globe. "Patience, Feyd." And he turned his attention back to the Mentat. "What of the Dukeling, the child Paul, my dear Piter?" 
    "The trap will bring him to you, Baron," Piter muttered.
    "That's not my question," the Baron said. "You'll recall that you predicted the Bene Gesserit witch would bear a daughter to the Duke. You were wrong, eh, Mentat?"
    "I'm not often wrong, Baron," Piter said, and for the first time there was fear in his voice. "Give me that: I'm not often wrong. And you know yourself these Bene Gesserit bear mostly daughters. Even the Emperor's consort had produced only females." 
    "Uncle," said Feyd-Rautha, "you said there'd be something important here for me to --"
    "Listen to my nephew," the Baron said. "He aspires to rule my Barony, yet he cannot rule himself." The Baron stirred beside the globe, a shadow among shadows. "Well then, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen, I summoned you here hoping to teach you a bit of wisdom. Have you observed our good Mentat? You should've learned something from this exchange." 
    "But, Uncle --" 
    "A most efficient Mentat, Piter, wouldn't you say, Feyd?" 
    "Yes, but --"
    "Ah! Indeed but! But he consumes too much spice, eats it like candy. Look at his eyes! He might've come directly from the Arrakeen labor pool. Efficient, Piter, but he's still emotional and prone to passionate outbursts. Efficient, Piter, but he still can err."
    Piter spoke in a low, sullen tone: "Did you call me in here to impair my efficiency with criticism, Baron?"
    "Impair your efficiency? You know me better, Piter. I wish only for my nephew to understand the limitations of a Mentat." 
    "Are you already training my replacement?" Piter demanded.
    "Replace you? Why, Piter, where could I find another Mentat with your cunning and venom?" 
    "The same place you found me, Baron."
    "Perhaps I should at that," the Baron mused. "You do seem a bit unstable lately. And the spice you eat!"
    "Are my pleasures too expensive, Baron? Do you object to them?"
    "My dear Piter, your pleasures are what tie you to me. How could I object to that? I merely wish my nephew to observe this about you."
    "Then I'm on display," Piter said. "Shall I dance? Shall I perform my various functions for the eminent Feyd-Rau-" 
    "Precisely," the Baron said. "You are on display. Now, be silent." He glanced at Feyd-Rautha, noting his nephew's lips, the full and pouting look of them, the Harkonnen genetic marker, now twisted slightly in amusement. "This is a Mentat, Feyd. It has been trained and conditioned to perform certain duties. The fact that it's encased in a human body, however, must not be overlooked. A serious drawback, that. I sometimes think the ancients with their thinking machines had the right idea."
    "They were toys compared to me," Piter snarled. "You yourself, Baron, could outperform those machines."
    "Perhaps," the Baron said. "Ah, well . . . " He took a deep breath, belched. "Now, Piter, outline for my nephew the salient features of our campaign against the House of Atreides. Function as a Mentat for us, if you please."
    "Baron, I've warned you not to trust one so young with this information. My observations of --"
    "I'll be the judge of this," the Baron said. "I give you an order, Mentat. Perform one of your various functions."
    "So be it," Piter said. He straightened, assuming an odd attitude of dignity -- as though it were another mask, but this time clothing his entire body. "In a few days Standard, the entire household of the Duke Leto will embark on a Spacing Guild liner for Arrakis. The Guild will deposit them at the city of Arrakeen rather than at our city of Carthag. The Duke's Mentat, Thufir Hawat, will have concluded rightly that Arrakeen is easier to defend."
    "Listen carefully, Feyd," the Baron said. "Observe the plans within plans within plans."
    Feyd-Rautha nodded, thinking: This is more like it. The old monster is letting me in on secret things at last. He must really mean for me to be his heir.
    "There are several tangential possibilities," Piter said. "I indicate that House Atreides will go to Arrakis. We must not, however, ignore the possibility the Duke has contracted with the Guild to remove him to a place of safety outside the System. Others in like circumstances have become renegade Houses, taking family atomics and shields and fleeing beyond the Imperium." 
    "The Duke's too proud a man for that," the Baron said.
    "It is a possibility," Piter said. "The ultimate effect for us would be the same, however."
    "No, it would not!" the Baron growled. "I must have him dead and his line ended."
    "That's the high probability," Piter said. "There are certain preparations that indicate when a House is going renegade. The Duke appears to be doing none of these things." 
    "So," the Baron sighed. "Get on with it, Piter." 
    "At Arrakeen," Piter said, "the Duke and his family will occupy the Residency, lately the home of Count and Lady Fenring." 
    "The Ambassador to the Smugglers," the Baron chuckled. 
    "Ambassador to what?" Feyd-Rautha asked.
    "Your uncle makes a joke," Piter said. "He calls Count Fenring Ambassador to the Smugglers, indicating the Emperor's interest in smuggling operations on Arrakis." 
    Feyd-Rautha turned a puzzled stare on his uncle. "Why?" 
    "Don't be dense, Feyd," the Baron snapped. "As long as the Guild remains effectively outside Imperial control, how could it be otherwise? How else could spies and assassins move about?" 
    Feyd-Rautha's mouth made a soundless "Oh-h-h-h." 
    "We've arranged diversions at the Residency," Piter said. "There'll be an attempt on the life of the Atreides heir -- an attempt which could succeed." 
    "Piter," the Baron rumbled, "you indicated --" 
    "I indicated accidents can happen," Piter said. "And the attempt must appear valid."
    "Ah, but the lad has such a sweet young body," the Baron said. "Of course, he's potentially more dangerous than the father . . . with that witch mother training him. Accursed woman! Ah, well, please continue, Piter."
    "Hawat will have divined that we have an agent planted on him," Piter said. "The obvious suspect is Dr. Yueh, who is indeed our agent. But Hawat has investigated and found that our doctor is a Suk School graduate with Imperial Conditioning -- supposedly safe enough to minister even to the Emperor. Great store is set on Imperial Conditioning. It's assumed that ultimate conditioning cannot be removed without killing the subject. However, as someone once observed, given the right lever you can move a planet. We found the lever that moved the doctor."
    "How?" Feyd-Rautha asked. He found this a fascinating subject. Everyone knew you couldn't subvert Imperial Conditioning! 
    "Another time," the Baron said. "Continue, Piter." 
    "In place of Yueh," Piter said, "we'll drag a most interesting suspect across Hawat's path. The very audacity of this suspect will recommend her to Hawat's attention." 
    "Her?" Feyd-Rautha asked.
    "The Lady Jessica herself," the Baron said.
    "Is it not sublime?" Piter asked. "Hawat's mind will be so filled with this prospect it'll impair his function as a Mentat. He may even try to kill her." Piter frowned, then: "But I don't think he'll be able to carry it off." 
    "You don't want him to, eh?" the Baron asked.
    "Don't distract me," Piter said. "While Hawat's occupied with the Lady Jessica, we'll divert him further with uprisings in a few garrison towns and the like. These will be put down. The Duke must believe he's gaining a measure of security. Then, when the moment is ripe, we'll signal Yueh and move in with our major force . . . ah . . . " 
    "Go ahead, tell him all of it," the Baron said.
    "We'll move in strengthened by two legions of Sardaukar disguised in Harkonnen livery."
    "Sardaukar!" Feyd-Rautha breathed. His mind focused on the dread Imperial troops, the killers without mercy, the soldier fanatics of the Padishah Emperor.
    "You see how I trust you, Feyd," the Baron said. "No hint of this must ever reach another Great House, else the Landsraad might unite against the Imperial House and there'd be chaos." 
    "The main point," Piter said, "is this: since House Harkonnen is being used to do the Imperial dirty work, we've gained a true advantage. It's a dangerous advantage, to be sure, but if used cautiously, will bring House Harkonnen greater wealth than that of any other House in the Imperium."
    "You have no idea how much wealth is involved, Feyd," the Baron said. "Not in your wildest imaginings. To begin, we'll have an irrevocable directorship in the CHOAM Company." 
    Feyd-Rautha nodded. Wealth was the thing. CHOAM was the key to wealth, each noble House dipping from the company's coffers whatever it could under the power of the directorships. Those CHOAM directorships -- they were the real evidence of political power in the Imperium, passing with the shifts of voting strength within the Landsraad as it balanced itself against the Emperor and his supporters.
    "The Duke Leto," Piter said, "may attempt to flee to the new Fremen scum along the desert's edge. Or he may try to send his family into that imagined security. But that path is blocked by one of His Majesty's agents -- the planetary ecologist. You may remember him -- Kynes." 
    "Feyd remembers him," the Baron said. "Get on with it." 
    "You do not drool very prettily, Baron," Piter said. 
    "Get on with it, I command you!" the Baron roared.
    Piter shrugged. "If matters go as planned," he said, "House Harkonnen will have a subfief on Arrakis within a Standard year. Your uncle will have dispensation of that fief. His own personal agent will rule on Arrakis." 
    "More profits," Feyd-Rautha said.
    "Indeed," the Baron said. And he thought: It's only just. We're the ones who tamed Arrakis . . .except for the few mongrel Fremen hiding in the skirts of the desert . . . and some tame smugglers bound to the planet almost as tightly as the native labor pool.
    "And the Great Houses will know that the Baron has destroyed the Atreides," Piter said. "They will know." 
    "They will know," the Baron breathed.
    "Loveliest of all," Piter said, "is that the Duke will know, too. He knows now. He can already feel the trap."
    "It's true the Duke knows," the Baron said, and his voice held a note of sadness. "He could not help but know . . . more's the pity."
    The Baron moved out and away from the globe of Arrakis. As he emerged from the shadows, his figure took on dimension -- grossly and immensely fat. And with subtle bulges beneath folds of his dark robes to reveal that all this fat was sustained partly by portable suspensors harnessed to his flesh. He might weigh two hundred Standard kilos in actuality, but his feet would carry no more than fifty of them.
    "I am hungry," the Baron rumbled, and he rubbed his protruding lips with a beringed hand, stared down at Feyd-Rautha through fat-enfolded eyes. "Send for food, my darling. We will eat before we retire."

= = = = = =

Thus spoke St. Alia-of-the-Knife: "The Reverend Mother must combine the seductive wiles of a courtesan with the untouchable majesty of a virgin goddess, holding these attributes in tension so long as the powers of her youth endure. For when youth and beauty have gone, she will find that the place-between, once occupied by tension, has become a wellspring of cunning and resourcefulness."
-from "Muad'Dib, Family Commentaries" by the Princess Irulan

    "Well, Jessica, what have you to say for yourself?" asked the Reverend Mother.
    It was near sunset at Castle Caladan on the day of Paul's ordeal. The two women were alone in Jessica's morning room while Paul waited in the adjoining soundproofed Meditation Chamber.
    Jessica stood facing the south windows. She saw and yet did not see the evening's banked colors across meadow and river. She heard and yet did not hear the Reverend Mother's question.
    There had been another ordeal once -- so many years ago. A skinny girl with hair the color of bronze, her body tortured by the winds of puberty, had entered the study of the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Proctor Superior of the Bene Gesserit school on Wallach IX. Jessica looked down at her right hand, flexed the fingers, remembering the pain, the terror, the anger. 
    "Poor Paul," she whispered.
    "I asked you a question, Jessica!" The old woman's voice was snappish, demanding.
    "What? Oh . . . " Jessica tore her attention away from the past, faced the Reverend Mother, who sat with back to the stone wall between the two west windows. "What do you want me to say?" 
    "What do I want you to say? What do I want you to say?" The old voice carried a tone of cruel mimicry.
    "So I had a son!" Jessica flared. And she knew she was being goaded into this anger deliberately.
    "You were told to bear only daughters to the Atreides." 
    "It meant so much to him," Jessica pleaded.
    "And you in your pride thought you could produce the Kwisatz Haderach!" 
    Jessica lifted her chin. "I sensed the possibility." 
    "You thought only of your Duke's desire for a son," the old woman snapped. "And his desires don't figure in this. An Atreides daughter could've been wed to a Harkonnen heir and sealed the breach. You've hopelessly complicated matters. We may lose both bloodlines now."
    "You're not infallible," Jessica said. She braved the steady stare from the old eyes.
    Presently, the old woman muttered: "What's done is done." 
    "I vowed never to regret my decision," Jessica said.
    "How noble," the Reverend Mother sneered. "No regrets. We shall see when you're a fugitive with a price on your head and every man's hand turned against you to seek your life and the life of your son." 
    Jessica paled. "Is there no alternative?" 
    "Alternative? A Bene Gesserit should ask that?" 
    "I ask only what you see in the future with your superior abilities."
    "I see in the future what I've seen in the past. You well know the pattern of our affairs, Jessica. The race knows its own mortality and fears stagnation of its heredity. It's in the bloodstream -- the urge to mingle genetic strains without plan. The Imperium, the CHOAM Company, all the Great Houses, they are but bits of flotsam in the path of the flood."
    "CHOAM," Jessica muttered. "I suppose it's already decided how they'll redivide the spoils of Arrakis."
    "What is CHOAM but the weather vane of our times," the old woman said. "The Emperor and his friends now command fifty-nine point six-five per cent of the CHOAM directorship's votes. Certainly they smell profits, and likely as others smell those same profits his voting strength will increase. This is the pattern of history, girl."
    "That's certainly what I need right now," Jessica said. "A review of history."
    "Don't be facetious, girl! You know as well as I do what forces surround us. We've a three-point civilization: the Imperial Household balanced against the Federated Great Houses of the Landsraad, and between them, the Guild with its damnable monopoly on interstellar transport. In politics, the tripod is the most unstable of all structures. It'd be bad enough without the complication of a feudal trade culture which turns its back on most science." 
    Jessica spoke bitterly: "Chips in the path of the flood -- and this chip here, this is the Duke Leto, and this one's his son, and this one's --"
    "Oh, shut up, girl. You entered this with full knowledge of the delicate edge you walked." 
    " 'I am Bene Gesserit: I exist only to serve,' " Jessica quoted. 
    "Truth." the old woman said. "And all we can hope for now is to prevent this from erupting into general conflagration, to salvage what we can of the key bloodlines."
    Jessica closed her eyes, feeling tears press out beneath the lids. She fought down the inner trembling, the outer trembling, the uneven breathing, the ragged pulse, the sweating of the palms. Presently, she said, "I'll pay for my own mistake." 
    "And your son will pay with you." 
    "I'll shield him as well as I'm able."
    "Shield!" the old woman snapped. "You well know the weakness there! Shield your son too much, Jessica, and he'll not grow strong enough to fulfill any destiny."
    Jessica turned away, looked out the window at the gathering darkness. "Is it really that terrible, this planet of Arrakis?" 
    "Bad enough, but not all bad. The Missionaria Protectiva has been in there and softened it up somewhat." The Reverend Mother heaved herself to her feet, straightened a fold in her gown. "Call the boy in here. I must be leaving soon." 
    "Must you?"
    The old woman's voice softened. "Jessica, girl, I wish I could stand in your place and take your sufferings. But each of us must make her own path." 
    "I know."
    "You're as dear to me as any of my own daughters, but I cannot let that interfere with duty." 
    "I understand . . . the necessity."
    "What you did, Jessica, and why you did it -- we both know. But kindness forces me to tell you there's little chance your lad will be the Bene Gesserit Totality. You mustn't let yourself hope too much."
    Jessica shook tears from the corners of her eyes. It was an angry gesture. "You make me feel like a little girl again -- reciting my first lesson." She forced the words out: " 'Humans must never submit to animals.' " A dry sob shook her. In a low voice, she said: "I've been so lonely."
    "It should be one of the tests," the old woman said. "Humans are almost always lonely. Now summon the boy. He's had a long, frightening day. But he's had time to think and remember, and I must ask the other questions about these dreams of his." 
    Jessica nodded, went to the door of the Meditation Chamber, opened it. "Paul, come in now, please."
    Paul emerged with a stubborn slowness. He stared at his mother as though she were a stranger. Wariness veiled his eyes when he glanced at the Reverend Mother, but this time he nodded to her, the nod one gives an equal. He heard his mother close the door behind him.
    "Young man," the old woman said, "let's return to this dream business." 
    "What do you want?" 
    "Do you dream every night?"
    "Not dreams worth remembering. I can remember every dream, but some are worth remembering and some aren't." 
    "How do you know the difference?" 
    "I just know it."
    The old woman glanced at Jessica, back to Paul. "What did you dream last night? Was it worth remembering?"
    "Yes." Paul closed his eyes. "I dreamed a cavern . . . and water . . . and a girl there -- very skinny with big eyes. Her eyes are all blue, no whites in them. I talk to her and tell her about you, about seeing the Reverend Mother on Caladan." Paul opened his eyes.
    "And the thing you tell this strange girl about seeing me, did it happen today?"
    Paul thought about this, then: "Yes. I tell the girl you came and put a stamp of strangeness on me."
    "Stamp of strangeness," the old woman breathed, and again she shot a glance at Jessica, returned her attention to Paul. "Tell me truly now, Paul, do you often have dreams of things that happen afterward exactly as you dreamed them?" 
    "Yes. And I've dreamed about that girl before." 
    "Oh? You know her?" 
    "I will know her." 
    "Tell me about her."
    Again, Paul closed his eyes. "We're in a little place in some rocks where it's sheltered. It's almost night, but it's hot and I can see patches of sand out of an opening in the rocks. We're . . . waiting for something . . . for me to go meet some people. And she's frightened but trying to hide it from me, and I'm excited. And she says: 'Tell me about the waters of your homeworld, Usul.' " Paul opened his eyes. "Isn't that strange? My homeworld's Caladan. I've never even heard of a planet called Usul." 
    "Is there more to this dream?" Jessica prompted.
    "Yes. But maybe she was calling me Usul," Paul said. "I just thought of that." Again, he closed his eyes. "She asks me to tell her about the waters. And I take her hand. And I say I'll tell her a poem. And I tell her the poem, but I have to explain some of the words -- like beach and surf and seaweed and seagulls." 
    "What poem?" the Reverend Mother asked.
    Paul opened his eyes. "It's just one of Gurney Halleck's tone poems for sad times." 
    Behind Paul Jessica began to recite:

"I remember salt smoke from a beach fire 
And shadows under the pines --
Solid, clean . . . fixed --
Seagulls perched at the tip of land, 
White upon green . . . 
And a wind comes through the pines 
To sway the shadows; 
The seagulls spread their wings, 
Lift 
And fill the sky with screeches. 
And I hear the wind 
Blowing across our beach,
And the surf, 
And I see that our fire 
Has scorched the seaweed."

    "That's the one," Paul said.
    The old woman stared at Paul, then: "Young man, as a Proctor of the Bene Gesserit, I seek the Kwisatz Haderach, the male who truly can become one of us. Your mother sees this possibility in you, but she sees with the eyes of a mother. Possibility I see, too, but no more."
    She fell silent and Paul saw that she wanted him to speak. He waited her out.
    Presently, she said: "As you will, then. You've depths in you; that I'll grant." 
    "May I go now?" he asked.
    "Don't you want to hear what the Reverend Mother can tell you about the Kwisatz Haderach?" Jessica asked. 
    "She said those who tried for it died."
    "But I can help you with a few hints at why they failed," the Reverend Mother said.
    She talks of hints, Paul thought. She doesn't really know anything. And he said: "Hint then."
    "And be damned to me?" She smiled wryly, a crisscross of wrinkles in the old face. "Very well: 'That which submits rules.' " 
    He felt astonishment: she was talking about such elementary things as tension within meaning. Did she think his mother had taught him nothing at all?
    "That's a hint?" he asked.
    "We're not here to bandy words or quibble over their meaning," the old woman said. "The willow submits to the wind and prospers until one day it is many willows -- a wall against the wind. This is the willow's purpose."
    Paul stared at her. She said purpose and he felt the word buffet him, reinfecting him with terrible purpose. He experienced a sudden anger at her: fatuous old witch with her mouth full of platitudes.
    "You think I could be this Kwisatz Haderach," he said. "You talk about me, but you haven't said one thing about what we can do to help my father. I've heard you talking to my mother. You talk as though my father were dead. Well, he isn't!"
    "If there were a thing to be done for him, we'd have done it," the old woman growled. "We may be able to salvage you. Doubtful, but possible. But for your father, nothing. When you've learned to accept that as a fact, you've learned a real Bene Gesserit lesson."
    Paul saw how the words shook his mother. He glared at the old woman. How could she say such a thing about his father? What made her so sure? His mind seethed with resentment.
    The Reverend Mother looked at Jessica. "You've been training him in the Way -- I've seen the signs of it. I'd have done the same in your shoes and devil take the Rules." 
    Jessica nodded.
    "Now, I caution you," said the old woman, "to ignore the regular order of training. His own safety requires the Voice. He already has a good start in it, but we both know how much more he needs . . . and that desperately." She stepped close to Paul, stared down at him. "Goodbye, young human. I hope you make it. But if you don't -- well, we shall yet succeed."
    Once more she looked at Jessica. A flicker sign of understanding passed between them. Then the old woman swept from the room, her robes hissing, with not another backward glance. The room and its occupants already were shut from her thoughts.
    But Jessica had caught one glimpse of the Reverend Mother's face as she turned away. There had been tears on the seamed cheeks. The tears were more unnerving than any other word or sign that had passed between them this day.

= = = = = =

You have read that Muad'Dib had no playmates his own age on Caladan. The dangers were too great. But Muad'Dib did have wonderful companion-teachers. There was Gurney Halleck, the troubadour-warrior. You will sing some of Gurney's songs, as you read along in this book. There was Thufir Hawat, the old Mentat Master of Assassins, who struck fear even into the heart of the Padishah Emperor. There were Duncan Idaho, the Swordmaster of the Ginaz; Dr. Wellington Yueh, a name black in treachery but bright in knowledge; the Lady Jessica, who guided her son in the Bene Gesserit Way, and -- of course -- the Duke Leto, whose qualities as a father have long been overlooked.
-from "A Child's History of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Thufir Hawat slipped into the training room of Castle Caladan, closed the door softly. He stood there a moment, feeling old and tired and storm-leathered. His left leg ached where it had been slashed once in the service of the Old Duke.
    Three generations of them now, he thought.
    He stared across the big room bright with the light of noon pouring through the skylights, saw the boy seated with back to the door, intent on papers and charts spread across an ell table.
    How many times must I tell that lad never to settle himself with his back to a door? Hawat cleared his throat. 
    Paul remained bent over his studies.
    A cloud shadow passed over the skylights. Again, Hawat cleared his throat.
    Paul straightened, spoke without turning: "I know. I'm sitting with my back to a door." 
    Hawat suppressed a smile, strode across the room.
    Paul looked up at the grizzled old man who stopped at a corner of the table. Hawat's eyes were two pools of alertness in a dark and deeply seamed face.
    "I heard you coming down the hall," Paul said. "And I heard you open the door." 
    "The sounds I make could be imitated." 
    "I'd know the difference."
    He might at that, Hawat thought. That witch-mother of his is giving him the deep training, certainly. I wonder what her precious school thinks of that? Maybe that's why they sent the old Proctor here -- to whip our dear Lady Jessica into line.
    Hawat pulled up a chair across from Paul, sat down facing the door. He did it pointedly, leaned back and studied the room. It struck him as an odd place suddenly, a stranger-place with most of its hardware already gone off to Arrakis. A training table remained, and a fencing mirror with its crystal prisms quiescent, the target dummy beside it patched and padded, looking like an ancient foot soldier maimed and battered in the wars. 
    There stand I, Hawat thought.
    "Thufir, what're you thinking?" Paul asked.
    Hawat looked at the boy. "I was thinking we'll all be out of here soon and likely never see the place again." 
    "Does that make you sad?"
    "Sad? Nonsense! Parting with friends is a sadness. A place is only a place." He glanced at the charts on the table. "And Arrakis is just another place." 
    "Did my father send you up to test me?"
    Hawat scowled -- the boy had such observing ways about him. He nodded. "You're thinking it'd have been nicer if he'd come up himself, but you must know how busy he is. He'll be along later." 
    "I've been studying about the storms on Arrakis." 
    "The storms. I see." 
    "They sound pretty bad."
    "That's too cautious a word: bad. Those storms build up across six or seven thousand kilometers of flatlands, feed on anything that can give them a push -- coriolis force, other storms, anything that has an ounce of energy in it. They can blow up to seven hundred kilometers an hour, loaded with everything loose that's in their way -- sand, dust, everything. They can eat flesh off bones and etch the bones to slivers." 
    "Why don't they have weather control?"
    "Arrakis has special problems, costs are higher, and there'd be maintenance and the like. The Guild wants a dreadful high price for satellite control and your father's House isn't one of the big rich ones, lad. You know that." 
    "Have you ever seen the Fremen?" 
    The lad's mind is darting all over today, Hawat thought.
    "Like as not I have seen them," he said. "There's little to tell them from the folk of the graben and sink. They all wear those great flowing robes. And they stink to heaven in any closed space. It's from those suits they wear  -- call them 'stillsuits' -- that reclaim the body's own water."
    Paul swallowed, suddenly aware of the moisture in his mouth, remembering a dream of thirst. That people could want so for water they had to recycle their body moisture struck him with a feeling of desolation. "Water's precious there," he said.
    Hawat nodded, thinking: Perhaps I'm doing it, getting across to him the importance of this planet as an enemy. It's madness to go in there without that caution in our minds.
    Paul looked up at the skylight, aware that it had begun to rain. He saw the spreading wetness on the gray meta-glass. "Water," he said.
    "You'll learn a great concern for water," Hawat said. "As the Duke's son you'll never want for it, but you'll see the pressures of thirst all around you."
    Paul wet his lips with his tongue, thinking back to the day a week ago and the ordeal with the Reverend Mother. She, too, had said something about water starvation.
    "You'll learn about the funeral plains," she'd said, "about the wilderness that is empty, the wasteland where nothing lives except the spice and the sandworms. You'll stain your eyepits to reduce the sun glare. Shelter will mean a hollow out of the wind and hidden from view. You'll ride upon your own two feet without 'thopter or groundcar or mount."
    And Paul had been caught more by her tone -- singsong and wavering -- than by her words.
    "When you live upon Arrakis," she had said, "khala, the land is empty. The moons will be your friends, the sun your enemy." 
    Paul had sensed his mother come up beside him away from her post guarding the door. She had looked at the Reverend Mother and asked: "Do you see no hope. Your Reverence?"
    "Not for the father." And the old woman had waved Jessica to silence, looked down at Paul. "Grave this on your memory, lad: A world is supported by four things . . . " She held up four big-knuckled fingers. ". . . the learning of the wise, the justice of the great, the prayers of the righteous and the valor of the brave. But all of these are as nothing . . . " She closed her fingers into a fist. ". . . without a ruler who knows the art of ruling. Make that the science of your tradition!"
    A week had passed since that day with the Reverend Mother. Her words were only now beginning to come into full register. Now, sitting in the training room with Thufir Hawat, Paul felt a sharp pang of fear. He looked across at the Mentat's puzzled frown.
    "Where were you woolgathering that time?" Hawat asked.
    "Did you meet the Reverend Mother?"
    "That Truthsayer witch from the Imperium?" Hawat's eyes quickened with interest. "I met her."
    "She . . . " Paul hesitated, found that he couldn't tell Hawat about the ordeal. The inhibitions went deep. 
    "Yes? What did she?"
    Paul took two deep breaths. "She said a thing." He closed his eyes, calling up the words, and when he spoke his voice unconsciously took on some of the old woman's tone: " 'You, Paul Atreides, descendant of kings, son of a Duke, you must learn to rule. It's something none of your ancestors learned.' " Paul opened his eyes, said: "That made me angry and I said my father rules an entire planet. And she said, 'He's losing it.' And I said my father was getting a richer planet. And she said. 'He'll lose that one, too.' And I wanted to run and warn my father, but she said he'd already been warned -- by you, by Mother, by many people." 
    "True enough," Hawat muttered. 
    "Then why're we going?" Paul demanded.
    "Because the Emperor ordered it. And because there's hope in spite of what that witch-spy said. What else spouted from this ancient fountain of wisdom?"
    Paul looked down at his right hand clenched into a fist beneath the table. Slowly, he willed the muscles to relax. She put some kind of hold on me, he thought. How?
    "She asked me to tell her what it is to rule," Paul said. "And I said that one commands. And she said I had some unlearning to do."
    She hit a mark there right enough, Hawat thought. He nodded for Paul to continue.
    "She said a ruler must learn to persuade and not to compel. She said he must lay the best coffee hearth to attract the finest men." 
    "How'd she figure your father attracted men like Duncan and Gurney?" Hawat asked.
    Paul shrugged. "Then she said a good ruler has to learn his world's language, that it's different for every world. And I thought she meant they didn't speak Galach on Arrakis, but she said that wasn't it at all. She said she meant the language of the rocks and growing things, the language you don't hear just with your ears. And I said that's what Dr. Yueh calls the Mystery of Life." 
    Hawat chuckled. "How'd that sit with her?"
    "I think she got mad. She said the mystery of life isn't a problem to solve, but a reality to experience. So I quoted the First Law of Mentat at her: 'A process cannot be understood by stopping it. Understanding must move with the flow of the process, must join it and flow with it.' That seemed to satisfy her."
    He seems to be getting over it, Hawat thought, but that old witch frightened him. Why did she do it?
    "Thufir," Paul said, "will Arrakis be as bad as she said?" 
    "Nothing could be that bad," Hawat said and forced a smile. "Take those Fremen, for example, the renegade people of the desert. By first-approximation analysis, I can tell you there're many, many more of them than the Imperium suspects. People live there, lad: a great many people, and . . ." Hawat put a sinewy finger beside his eye. ". . . they hate Harkonnens with a bloody passion. You must not breathe a word of this, lad. I tell you only as your father's helper."
    "My father has told me of Salusa Secundus," Paul said. "Do you know, Thufir, it sounds much like Arrakis . . . perhaps not quite as bad, but much like it."
    "We do not really know of Salusa Secundus today," Hawat said. "Only what it was like long ago . . . mostly. But what is known -- you're right on that score."
    "Will the Fremen help us?"
    "It's a possibility." Hawat stood up. "I leave today for Arrakis. Meanwhile, you take care of yourself for an old man who's fond of you, heh? Come around here like the good lad and sit facing the door. It's not that I think there's any danger in the castle; it's just a habit I want you to form."
    Paul got to his feet, moved around the table. "You're going today?"
    "Today it is, and you'll be following tomorrow. Next time we meet it'll be on the soil of your new world." He gripped Paul's right arm at the bicep. "Keep your knife arm free, heh? And your shield at full charge." He released the arm, patted Paul's shoulder, whirled and strode quickly to the door. 
    "Thufir! "Paul called.
    Hawat turned, standing in the open doorway. 
    "Don't sit with your back to any doors," Paul said.
    A grin spread across the seamed old face. "That I won't, lad. Depend on it." And he was gone, shutting the door softly behind.
    Paul sat down where Hawat had been, straightened the papers. One more day here, he thought. He looked around the room. We 're leaving. The idea of departure was suddenly more real to him than it had ever been before. He recalled another thing the old woman had said about a world being the sum of many things -- the people, the dirt, the growing things, the moons, the tides, the suns -- the unknown sum called nature, a vague summation without any sense of the now. And he wondered: What is the now?
    The door across from Paul banged open and an ugly lump of a man lurched through it preceded by a handful of weapons.
    "Well, Gurney Halleck," Paul called, "are you the new weapons master?"
    Halleck kicked the door shut with one heel. "You'd rather I came to play games, I know," he said. He glanced abound the room, noting that Hawat's men already had been over it, checking, making it safe for a duke's heir. The subtle code signs were all around.
    Paul watched the rolling, ugly man set himself back in motion, veer toward the training table with the load of weapons, saw the nine-string baliset slung over Gurney's shoulder with the multipick woven through the strings near the head of the fingerboard.
    Halleck dropped the weapons on the exercise table, lined them up -- the rapiers, the bodkins, the kindjals, the slow-pellet stunners, the shield belts. The inkvine scar along his jawline writhed as he turned, casting a smile across the room.
    "So you don't even have a good morning for me, you young imp," Halleck said. "And what barb did you sink in old Hawat? He passed me in the hall like a man running to his enemy's funeral." 
    Paul grinned. Of all his father's men, he liked Gurney Halleck best, knew the man's moods and deviltry, his humors, and thought of him more as a friend than as a hired sword.
    Halleck swung the baliset off his shoulder, began tuning it. "If y' won't talk, y' won't," he said.
    Paul stood, advanced across the room, calling out: "Well, Gurney, do we come prepared for music when it's fighting time?" 
    "So it's sass for our elders today," Halleck said. He tried a chord on the instrument, nodded.
    "Where's Duncan Idaho?" Paul asked. "Isn't he supposed to be teaching me weaponry?"
    "Duncan's gone to lead the second wave onto Arrakis," Halleck said. "All you have left is poor Gurney who's fresh out of fight and spoiling for music." He struck another chord, listened to it, smiled. "And it was decided in council that you being such a poor fighter we'd best teach you the music trade so's you won't waste your life entire."
    "Maybe you'd better sing me a lay then," Paul said. "I want to be sure how not to do it."
    "Ah-h-h, hah!" Gurney laughed, and he swung into "Galacian Girls." his multipick a blur over the strings as he sang:

"Oh-h-h, the Galacian girls 
Will do it for pearls, 
And the Arrakeen for water! 
But if you desire dames 
Like consuming flames, 
Try a Caladanin daughter!"

    "Not bad for such a poor hand with the pick," Paul said, "but if my mother heard you singing a bawdy like that in the castle, she'd have your ears on the outer wall for decoration." 
    Gurney pulled at his left ear. "Poor decoration, too, they having been bruised so much listening at keyholes while a young lad I know practiced some strange ditties on his baliset."
    "So you've forgotten what it's like to find sand in your bed," Paul said. He pulled a shield belt from the table, buckled it fast around his waist. "Then, let's fight!"
    Halleck's eyes went wide in mock surprise. "So! It was your wicked hand did that deed! Guard yourself today, young master -- guard yourself." He grabbed up a rapier, laced the air with it. "I'm a hellfiend out for revenge!"
    Paul lifted the companion rapier, bent it in his hands, stood in the aguile, one foot forward. He let his manner go solemn in a comic imitation of Dr. Yueh.
    "What a dolt my father sends me for weaponry," Paul intoned. "This doltish Gurney Halleck has forgotten the first lesson for a fighting man armed and shielded." Paul snapped the force button at his waist, felt the crinkled-skin tingling of the defensive field at his forehead and down his back, heard external sounds take on characteristic shield-filtered flatness. "In shield fighting, one moves fast on defense, slow on attack," Paul said. "Attack has the sole purpose of tricking the opponent into a misstep, setting him up for the attack sinister. The shield turns the fast blow, admits the slow kindjal!" Paul snapped up the rapier, feinted fast and whipped it back for a slow thrust timed to enter a shield's mindless defenses.
    Halleck watched the action, turned at the last minute to let the blunted blade pass his chest. "Speed, excellent," he said. "But you were wide open for an underhanded counter with a slip-tip." 
    Paul stepped back, chagrined.
    "I should whap your backside for such carelessness," Halleck said. He lifted a naked kindjal from the table and held it up. "This in the hand of an enemy can let out your life's blood! You're an apt pupil, none better, but I've warned you that not even in play do you let a man inside your guard with death in his hand."
    "I guess I'm not in the mood for it today," Paul said.
    "Mood?" Halleck's voice betrayed his outrage even through the shield's filtering. "What has mood to do with it? You fight when the necessity arises -- no matter the mood! Mood's a thing for cattle or making love or playing the baliset. It's not for fighting." 
    "I'm sorry, Gurney." 
    "You're not sorry enough!"
    Halleck activated his own shield, crouched with kindjal outthrust in left hand, the rapier poised high in his right. "Now I say guard yourself for true!" He leaped high to one side, then forward, pressing a furious attack.
    Paul fell back, parrying. He felt the field crackling as shield edges touched and repelled each other, sensed the electric tingling of the contact along his skin. What's gotten into Gurney? he asked himself. He's not faking this! Paul moved his left hand, dropped his bodkin into his palm from its wrist sheath.
    "You see a need for an extra blade, eh?" Halleck grunted. 
    Is this betrayal? Paul wondered. Surely not Gurney!
    Around the room they fought -- thrust and parry, feint and counterfeint. The air within their shield bubbles grew stale from the demands on it that the slow interchange along barrier edges could not replenish. With each new shield contact, the smell of ozone grew stronger.
    Paul continued to back, but now he directed his retreat toward the exercise table. If I can turn him beside the table, I'll show him a trick, Paul thought. One more step, Gurney. 
    Halleck took the step.
    Paul directed a parry downward, turned, saw Halleck's rapier catch against the table's edge. Paul flung himself aside, thrust high with rapier and came in across Halleck's neckline with the bodkin. He stopped the blade an inch from the jugular. 
    "Is this what you seek?" Paul whispered. 
    "Look down, lad," Gurney panted.
    Paul obeyed, saw Halleck's kindjal thrust under the table's edge, the tip almost touching Paul's groin.
    "We'd have joined each other in death," Halleck said. "But I'll admit you fought some better when pressed to it. You seemed to get the mood." And he grinned wolfishly, the inkvine scar rippling along his jaw.
    "The way you came at me," Paul said. "Would you really have drawn my blood?"
    Halleck withdrew the kindjal, straightened. "If you'd fought one whit beneath your abilities. I'd have scratched you a good one, a scar you'd remember. I'll not have my favorite pupil fall to the first Harkonnen tramp who happens along."
    Paul deactivated his shield, leaned on the table to catch his breath. "I deserved that, Gurney. But it would've angered my father if you'd hurt me. I'll not have you punished for my failing." 
    "As to that," Halleck said, "it was my failing, too. And you needn't worry about a training scar or two. You're lucky you have so few. As to your father -- the Duke'd punish me only if I failed to make a first-class fighting man out of you. And I'd have been failing there if I hadn't explained the fallacy in this mood thing you've suddenly developed." 
    Paul straightened, slipped his bodkin back into its wrist sheath. 
    "It's not exactly play we do here," Halleck said.
    Paul nodded. He felt a sense of wonder at the uncharacteristic seriousness in Halleck's manner, the sobering intensity. He looked at the beet-colored inkvine scar on the man's jaw, remembering the story of how it had been put there by Beast Rabban in a Harkonnen slave pit on Giedi Prime. And Paul felt a sudden shame that he had doubted Halleck even for an instant. It occurred to Paul, then, that the making of Halleck's scar had been accompanied by pain -- a pain as intense, perhaps, as that inflicted by a Reverend Mother. He thrust this thought aside; it chilled their world.
    "I guess I did hope for some play today," Paul said. "Things are so serious around here lately."
    Halleck turned away to hide his emotions. Something burned in his eyes. There was pain in him -- like a blister, all that was left of some lost yesterday that Time had pruned off him.
    How soon this child must assume his manhood, Halleck thought. How soon he must read that form within his mind, that contract of brutal caution, to enter the necessary fact on the necessary line: "Please list your next of kin."
    Halleck spoke without turning: "I sensed the play in you, lad, and I'd like nothing better than to join in it. But this no longer can be play. Tomorrow we go to Arrakis. Arrakis is real. The Harkonnens are real." 
    Paul touched his forehead with his rapier blade held vertical.
    Halleck turned, saw the salute and acknowledged it with a nod. He gestured to the practice dummy. "Now, we'll work on your timing. Let me see you catch that thing sinister. I'll control it from over here where I can have a full view of the action. And I warn you I'll be trying new counters today. There's a warning you'd not get from a real enemy."
    Paul stretched up on his toes to relieve his muscles. He felt solemn with the sudden realization that his life had become filled with swift changes. He crossed to the dummy, slapped the switch on its chest with his rapier tip and felt the defensive field forcing his blade away.
    "En garde!" Halleck called, and the dummy pressed the attack. 
    Paul activated his shield, parried and countered.
    Halleck watched as he manipulated the controls. His mind seemed to be in two parts: one alert to the needs of the training fight, and the other wandering in fly-buzz.
    I'm the well-trained fruit tree, he thought. Full of well-trained feelings and abilities and all of them grafted onto me -- all bearing for someone else to pick.
    For some reason, he recalled his younger sister, her elfin face so clear in his mind. But she was dead now -- in a pleasure house for Harkonnen troops. She had loved pansies . . . or was it daisies? He couldn't remember. It bothered him that he couldn't remember.
    Paul countered a slow swing of the dummy, brought up his left hand entretisser.
    That clever little devil! Halleck thought, intent now on Paul's interweaving hand motions. He's been practicing and studying on his own. That's not Duncan's style, and it's certainly nothing I've taught him.
    This thought only added to Halleck's sadness. I'm infected by mood, he thought. And he began to wonder about Paul, if the boy ever listened fearfully to his pillow throbbing in the night. 
    "If wishes were fishes we'd all cast nets," he murmured.
    It was his mother's expression and he always used it when he felt the blackness of tomorrow on him. Then he thought what an odd expression that was to be taking to a planet that had never known seas or fishes.

= = = = = =

YUEH (yu'e), Wellington (weling-tun), Stdrd 10,082-10,191; medical doctor of the Suk School (grd Stdrd 10,112); md: Wanna Marcus, B.G. (Stdrd 10,092-10,186?); chiefly noted as betrayer of Duke Leto Atreides. (Cf: Bibliography, Appendix VII [Imperial Conditioning] and Betrayal, The.)
-from "Dictionary of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Although he heard Dr. Yueh enter the training room, noting the stiff deliberation of the man's pace, Paul remained stretched out face down on the exercise table where the masseuse had left him. He felt deliciously relaxed after the workout with Gurney Halleck.
    "You do look comfortable," said Yueh in his calm, high-pitched voice.
    Paul raised his head, saw the man's stick figure standing several paces away, took in at a glance the wrinkled black clothing, the square block of a head with purple lips and drooping mustache, the diamond tattoo of Imperial Conditioning on his forehead, the long black hair caught in the Suk School's silver ring at the left shoulder.
    "You'll be happy to hear we haven't time for regular lessons today," Yueh said. "Your father will be along presently." 
    Paul sat up.
    "However, I've arranged for you to have a filmbook viewer and several lessons during the crossing to Arrakis." 
    "Oh."
    Paul began pulling on his clothes. He felt excitement that his father would be coming. They had spent so little time together since the Emperor's command to take over the fief of Arrakis.
    Yueh crossed to the ell table, thinking: How the boy has filled out these past few months. Such a waste! Oh, such a sad waste. And he reminded himself: I must not falter. What I do is done to be certain my Wanna no longer can be hurt by the Harkonnen beasts.
    Paul joined him at the table, buttoning his jacket. "What'll I be studying on the way across?"
    "Ah-h-h-h, the terranic life forms of Arrakis. The planet seems to have opened its arms to certain terranic life forms. It's not clear how. I must seek out the planetary ecologist when we arrive -- a Dr. Kynes -- and offer my help in the investigation."
    And Yueh thought: What am I saying? I play the hypocrite even with myself.
    "Will there be something on the Fremen?" Paul asked.
    "The Fremen?" Yueh drummed his fingers on the table, caught Paul staring at the nervous motion, withdrew his hand.
    "Maybe you have something on the whole Arrakeen population," Paul said.
    "Yes, to be sure," Yueh said. "There are two general separations of the people -- Fremen, they are one group, and the others are the people of the graben, the sink, and the pan. There's some intermarriage, I'm told. The women of pan and sink villages prefer Fremen husbands; their men prefer Fremen wives. They have a saying: 'Polish comes from the cities; wisdom from the desert.' "
    "Do you have pictures of them?"
    "I'll see what I can get you. The most interesting feature, of course, is their eyes -- totally blue, no whites in them." 
    "Mutation?" 
    "No; it's linked to saturation of the blood with melange." 
    "The Fremen must be brave to live at the edge of that desert." 
    "By all accounts," Yueh said. "They compose poems to their knives. Their women are as fierce as the men. Even Fremen children are violent and dangerous. You'll not be permitted to mingle with them, I daresay."
    Paul stared at Yueh, finding in these few glimpses of the Fremen a power of words that caught his entire attention. What a people to win as allies!
    "And the worms?" Paul asked. 
    "What?" 
    "I'd like to study more about the sandworms." 
    "Ah-h-h-h, to be sure. I've a filmbook on a small specimen, only one hundred and ten meters long and twenty-two meters in diameter. It was taken in the northern latitudes. Worms of more than four hundred meters in length have been recorded by reliable witnesses, and there's reason to believe even larger ones exist." 
    Paul glanced down at a conical projection chart of the northern Arrakeen latitudes spread on the table. "The desert belt and south polar regions are marked uninhabitable. Is it the worms?" 
    "And the storms." 
    "But any place can be made habitable."
    "If it's economically feasible," Yueh said. "Arrakis has many costly perils." He smoothed his drooping mustache. "Your father will be here soon. Before I go, I've a gift for you, something I came across in packing." He put an object on the table between them -- black, oblong, no larger than the end of Paul's thumb.
    Paul looked at it. Yueh noted how the boy did not reach for it, and thought: How cautious he is.
    "It's a very old Orange Catholic Bible made for space travelers. Not a filmbook, but actually printed on filament paper. It has its own magnifier and electrostatic charge system." He picked it up, demonstrated. "The book is held closed by the charge, which forces against spring-locked covers. You press the edge -- thus, and the pages you've selected repel each other and the book opens." 
    "It's so small."
    "But it has eighteen hundred pages. You press the edge -- thus, and so . . . and the charge moves ahead one page at a time as you read. Never touch the actual pages with your fingers. The filament tissue is too delicate." He closed the book, handed it to Paul. "Try it."
    Yueh watched Paul work the page adjustment, thought: I salve my own conscience. I give him the surcease of religion before betraying him. Thus may I say to myself that he has gone where I cannot go.
    "This must've been made before filmbooks," Paul said.
    "It's quite old. Let it be our secret, eh? Your parents might think it too valuable for one so young."
    And Yueh thought: His mother would surely wonder at my motives.
    "Well . . . " Paul closed the book, held it in his hand. "If it's so valuable . . . "
    "Indulge an old man's whim," Yueh said. "It was given to me when I was very young." And he thought: I must catch his mind as well as his cupidity. "Open it to four-sixty-seven Kalima -- where it says: 'From water does all life begin.' There's a slight notch on the edge of the cover to mark the place."
    Paul felt the cover, detected two notches, one shallower than the other. He pressed the shallower one and the book spread open on his palm, its magnifier sliding into place. 
    "Read it aloud," Yueh said.
    Paul wet his lips with his tongue, read: "Think you of the fact that a deaf person cannot hear. Then, what deafness may we not all possess? What senses do we lack that we cannot see and cannot hear another world all around us? What is there around us that we cannot --" 
    "Stop it!" Yueh barked. 
    Paul broke off, stared at him.
    Yueh closed his eyes, fought to regain composure. What perversity caused the book to open at my Wanna's favorite passage? He opened his eyes, saw Paul staring at him.
    "Is something wrong?" Paul asked.
    "I'm sorry," Yueh said. "That was . . . my . . . dead wife's favorite passage. It's not the one I intended you to read. It brings up memories that are . . . painful." 
    "There are two notches," Paul said.
    Of course, Yueh thought. Wanna marked her passage. His fingers are more sensitive than mine and found her mark. It was an accident, no more.
    "You may find the book interesting," Yueh said. "It has much historical truth in it as well as good ethical philosophy." 
    Paul looked down at the tiny book in his palm -- such a small thing. Yet, it contained a mystery . . . something had happened while he read from it. He had felt something stir his terrible purpose.
    "Your father will be here any minute," Yueh said. "Put the book away and read it at your leisure."
    Paul touched the edge of it as Yueh had shown him. The book sealed itself. He slipped it into his tunic. For a moment there when Yueh had barked at him, Paul had feared the man would demand the book's return.
    "I thank you for the gift. Dr. Yueh," Paul said, speaking formally. "It will be our secret. If there is a gift of favor you wish from me, please do not hesitate to ask." 
    "I . . . need for nothing," Yueh said.
    And he thought: Why do I stand here torturing myself? And torturing this poor lad . . . though he does not know it. Oeyh! Damn those Harkonnen beasts! Why did they choose me for their abomination?

= = = = = = 

How do we approach the study of Muad'Dib's father? A man of surpassing warmth and surprising coldness was the Duke Leto Atreides. Yet, many facts open the way to this Duke: his abiding love for his Bene Gesserit lady; the dreams he held for his son; the devotion with which men served him. You see him there -- a man snared by Destiny, a lonely figure with his light dimmed behind the glory of his son. Still, one must ask: What is the son but an extension of the father?
-from "Muad'Dib, Family Commentaries" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul watched his father enter the training room, saw the guards take up stations outside. One of them closed the door. As always, Paul experienced a sense of presence in his father, someone totally here.
    The Duke was tall, olive-skinned. His thin face held harsh angles warmed only by deep gray eyes. He wore a black working uniform with red armorial hawk crest at the breast. A silvered shield belt with the patina of much use girded his narrow waist.
    The Duke said: "Hard at work, Son?"
    He crossed to the ell table, glanced at the papers on it, swept his gaze around the room and back to Paul. He felt tired, filled with the ache of not showing his fatigue. I must use every opportunity to rest during the crossing to Arrakis, he thought. There'll be no rest on Arrakis.
    "Not very hard," Paul said. "Everything's so . . . " He shrugged.
    "Yes. Well, tomorrow we leave. It'll be good to get settled in our new home, put all this upset behind."
    Paul nodded, suddenly overcome by memory of the Reverend Mother's words: " . . . for the father, nothing."
    "Father," Paul said, "will Arrakis be as dangerous as everyone says?"
    The Duke forced himself to the casual gesture, sat down on a corner of the table, smiled. A whole pattern of conversation welled up in his mind -- the kind of thing he might use to dispel the vapors in his men before a battle. The pattern froze before it could be vocalized, confronted by the single thought: 
    This is my son.
    "It'll be dangerous," he admitted.
    "Hawat tells me we have a plan for the Fremen," Paul said. And he wondered: Why don't I tell him what that old woman said? How did she seal my tongue?
    The Duke noted his son's distress, said: "As always, Hawat sees the main chance. But there's much more. I see also the Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles -- the CHOAM Company. By giving me Arrakis, His Majesty is forced to give us a CHOAM directorship . . . a subtle gain." 
    "CHOAM controls the spice," Paul said.
    "And Arrakis with its spice is our avenue into CHOAM," the Duke said. "There's more to CHOAM than melange." 
    "Did the Reverend Mother warn you?" Paul blurted. He clenched his fists, feeling his palms slippery with perspiration. The effort it had taken to ask that question.
    "Hawat tells me she frightened you with warnings about Arrakis," the Duke said. "Don't let a woman's fears cloud your mind. No woman wants her loved ones endangered. The hand behind those warnings was your mother's. Take this as a sign of her love for us." 
    "Does she know about the Fremen?" 
    "Yes, and about much more." 
    "What?"
    And the Duke thought: The truth could be worse than he imagines, but even dangerous facts are valuable if you've been trained to deal with them. And there's one place where nothing has been spared for my son -- dealing with dangerous facts. This must be leavened, though; he is young.
    "Few products escape the CHOAM touch," the Duke said. "Logs, donkeys, horses, cows, lumber, dung, sharks, whale fur -- the most prosaic and the most exotic . . . even our poor pundi rice from Caladan. Anything the Guild will transport, the art forms of Ecaz, the machines of Richesse and Ix. But all fades before melange. A handful of spice will buy a home on Tupile. It cannot be manufactured, it must be mined on Arrakis. It is unique and it has true geriatric properties." 
    "And now we control it?"
    "To a certain degree. But the important thing is to consider all the Houses that depend on CHOAM profits. And think of the enormous proportion of those profits dependent upon a single product -- the spice. Imagine what would happen if something should reduce spice production."
    "Whoever had stockpiled melange could make a killing," Paul said. "Others would be out in the cold."
    The Duke permitted himself a moment of grim satisfaction, looking at his son and thinking how penetrating, how truly educated that observation had been. He nodded. "The Harkonnens have been stockpiling for more than twenty years." 
    "They mean spice production to fail and you to be blamed."
    "They wish the Atreides name to become unpopular," the Duke said. "Think of the Landsraad Houses that look to me for a certain amount of leadership -- their unofficial spokesman. Think how they'd react if I were responsible for a serious reduction in their income. After all, one's own profits come first. The Great Convention be damned! You can't let someone pauperize you!" A harsh smile twisted the Duke's mouth. "They'd look the other way no matter what was done to me." 
    "Even if we were attacked with atomics?"
    "Nothing that flagrant. No open defiance of the Convention. But almost anything else short of that . . . perhaps even dusting and a bit of soil poisoning." 
    "Then why are we walking into this?"
    "Paul!" The Duke frowned at his son. "Knowing where the trap is -- that's the first step in evading it. This is like single combat, Son, only on a larger scale -- a feint within a feint within a feint . . . seemingly without end. The task is to unravel it. Knowing that the Harkonnens stockpile melange, we ask another question: Who else is stockpiling? That's the list of our enemies." 
    "Who?"
    "Certain Houses we knew were unfriendly and some we'd thought friendly. We need not consider them for the moment because there is one other much more important: our beloved Padishah Emperor."
    Paul tried to swallow in a throat suddenly dry. "Couldn't you convene the Landsraad, expose --"
    "Make our enemy aware we know which hand holds the knife? Ah, now, Paul -- we see the knife, now. Who knows where it might be shifted next? If we put this before the Landsraad it'd only create a great cloud of confusion. The Emperor would deny it. Who could gainsay him? All we'd gain is a little time while risking chaos. And where would the next attack come from?" 
    "All the Houses might start stockpiling spice." 
    "Our enemies have a head start -- too much of a lead to overcome." 
    "The Emperor," Paul said. "That means the Sardaukar." 
    "Disguised in Harkonnen livery, no doubt," the Duke said. "But the soldier fanatics nonetheless." 
    "How can Fremen help us against Sardaukar?" 
    "Did Hawat talk to you about Salusa Secundus?" 
    "The Emperor's prison planet? No."
    "What if it were more than a prison planet, Paul? There's a question you never hear asked about the Imperial Corps of Sardaukar: Where do they come from?" 
    "From the prison planet?" 
    "They come from somewhere." 
    "But the supporting levies the Emperor demands from --" 
    "That's what we're led to believe: they're just the Emperor's levies trained young and superbly. You hear an occasional muttering about the Emperor's training cadres, but the balance of our civilization remains the same: the military forces of the Landsraad Great Houses on one side, the Sardaukar and their supporting levies on the other. And their supporting levies, Paul. The Sardaukar remain the Sardaukar." 
    "But every report on Salusa Secundus says S.S. is a hell world!" 
    "Undoubtedly. But if you were going to raise tough, strong, ferocious men, what environmental conditions would you impose on them?"
    "How could you win the loyalty of such men?" 
    "There are proven ways: play on the certain knowledge of their superiority, the mystique of secret covenant, the esprit of shared suffering. It can be done. It has been done on many worlds in many times."
    Paul nodded, holding his attention on his father's face. He felt some revelation impending.
    "Consider Arrakis," the Duke said. "When you get outside the towns and garrison villages, it's every bit as terrible a place as Salusa Secundus." 
    Paul's eyes went wide. "The Fremen!"
    "We have there the potential of a corps as strong and deadly as the Sardaukar. It'll require patience to exploit them secretly and wealth to equip them properly. But the Fremen are there . . . and the spice wealth is there. You see now why we walk into Arrakis, knowing the trap is there." 
    "Don't the Harkonnens know about the Fremen?" 
    "The Harkonnens sneered at the Fremen, hunted them for sport, never even bothered trying to count them. We know the Harkonnen policy with planetary populations -- spend as little as possible to maintain them."
    The metallic threads in the hawk symbol above his father's breast glistened as the Duke shifted his position. "You see?" 
    "We're negotiating with the Fremen right now," Paul said.
    "I sent a mission headed by Duncan Idaho," the Duke said. "A proud and ruthless man, Duncan, but fond of the truth. I think the Fremen will admire him. If we're lucky, they may judge us by him: Duncan, the moral." 
    "Duncan, the moral," Paul said, "and Gurney the valorous." 
    "You name them well," the Duke said.
    And Paul thought: Gurney's one of those the Reverend Mother meant, a supporter of worlds -- " . . . the valor of the brave." 
    "Gurney tells me you did well in weapons today," the Duke said.
    "That isn't what he told me."
    The Duke laughed aloud. "I figured Gurney to be sparse with his praise. He says you have a nicety of awareness -- in his own words -- of the difference between a blade's edge and its tip." 
    "Gurney says there's no artistry in killing with the tip, that it should be done with the edge."
    "Gurney's a romantic," the Duke growled. This talk of killing suddenly disturbed him, coming from his son. "I'd sooner you never had to kill . . . but if the need arises, you do it however you can -- tip or edge." He looked up at the skylight, on which the rain was drumming.
    Seeing the direction of his father's stare, Paul thought of the wet skies out there -- a thing never to be seen on Arrakis from all accounts -- and this thought of skies put him in mind of the space beyond. "Are the Guild ships really big?" he asked.
    The Duke looked at him. "This will be your first time off planet," he said. "Yes, they're big. We'll be riding a Heighliner because it's a long trip. A Heighliner is truly big. Its hold will tuck all our frigates and transports into a little corner -- we'll be just a small part of the ship's manifest." 
    "And we won't be able to leave our frigates?" 
    "That's part of the price you pay for Guild Security. There could be Harkonnen ships right alongside us and we'd have nothing to fear from them. The Harkonnens know better than to endanger their shipping privileges." 
    "I'm going to watch our screens and try to see a Guildsman." 
    "You won't. Not even their agents ever see a Guildsman. The Guild's as jealous of its privacy as it is of its monopoly. Don't do anything to endanger our shipping privileges, Paul." 
    "Do you think they hide because they've mutated and don't look . . . human anymore?"
    "Who knows?" The Duke shrugged. "It's a mystery we're not likely to solve. We've more immediate problems -- among them: you." 
    "Me?"
    "Your mother wanted me to be the one to tell you, Son. You see, you may have Mentat capabilities."
    Paul stared at his father, unable to speak for a moment, then: "A Mentat? Me? But I . . . " 
    "Hawat agrees, Son. It's true."
    "But I thought Mentat training had to start during infancy and the subject couldn't be told because it might inhibit the early . . . " He broke off, all his past circumstances coming to focus in one flashing computation. "I see," he said.
    "A day comes," the Duke said, "when the potential Mentat must learn what's being done. It may no longer be done to him. The Mentat has to share in the choice of whether to continue or abandon the training. Some can continue; some are incapable of it. Only the potential Mentat can tell this for sure about himself." 
    Paul rubbed his chin. All the special training from Hawat and his mother -- the mnemonics, the focusing of awareness, the muscle control and sharpening of sensitivities, the study of languages and nuances of voices -- all of it clicked into a new kind of understanding in his mind.
    "You'll be the Duke someday, Son," his father said. "A Mentat Duke would be formidable indeed. Can you decide now . . . or do you need more time?"
    There was no hesitation in his answer. "I'll go on with the training."
    "Formidable indeed," the Duke murmured, and Paul saw the proud smile on his father's face. The smile shocked Paul: it had a skull look on the Duke's narrow features. Paul closed his eyes, feeling the terrible purpose reawaken within him. Perhaps being a Mentat is terrible purpose, he thought.
    But even as he focused on this thought, his new awareness denied it.

= = = = = =

With the Lady Jessica and Arrakis, the Bene Gesserit system of sowing implant-legends through the Missionaria Protectiva came to its full fruition. The wisdom of seeding the known universe with a prophecy pattern for the protection of B.G. personnel has long been appreciated, but never have we seen a condition-ut-extremis with more ideal mating of person and preparation. The prophetic legends had taken on Arrakis even to the extent of adopted labels (including Reverend Mother, canto and respondu, and most of the Shari-a panoplia propheticus). And it is generally accepted now that the Lady Jessica's latent abilities were grossly underestimated.
-from "Analysis: The Arrakeen Crisis" by the Princess Irulan [Private circulation: B.G. file number AR-81088587]

    All around the Lady Jessica -- piled in corners of the Arrakeen great hall, mounded in the open spaces -- stood the packaged freight of their lives: boxes, trunks, cartons, cases -- some partly unpacked. She could hear the cargo handlers from the Guild shuttle depositing another load in the entry.
    Jessica stood in the center of the hall. She moved in a slow turn, looking up and around at shadowed carvings, crannies and deeply recessed windows. This giant anachronism of a room reminded her of the Sisters' Hall at her Bene Gesserit school. But at the school the effect had been of warmth. Here, all was bleak stone.
    Some architect had reached far back into history for these buttressed walls and dark hangings, she thought. The arched ceiling stood two stories above her with great crossbeams she felt sure had been shipped here to Arrakis across space at monstrous cost. No planet of this system grew trees to make such beams -- unless the beams were imitation wood. 
    She thought not.
    This had been the government mansion in the days of the Old Empire. Costs had been of less importance then. It had been before the Harkonnens and their new megalopolis of Carthag -- a cheap and brassy place some two hundred kilometers northeast across the Broken Land. Leto had been wise to choose this place for his seat of government. The name, Arrakeen, had a good sound, filled with tradition. And this was a smaller city, easier to sterilize and defend.
    Again there came the clatter of boxes being unloaded in the entry. Jessica sighed.
    Against a carton to her right stood the painting of the Duke's father. Wrapping twine hung from it like a frayed decoration. A piece of the twine was still clutched in Jessica's left hand. Beside the painting lay a black bull's head mounted on a polished board. The head was a dark island in a sea of wadded paper. Its plaque lay flat on the floor, and the bull's shiny muzzle pointed at the ceiling as though the beast were ready to bellow a challenge into this echoing room.
    Jessica wondered what compulsion had brought her to uncover those two things first -- the head and the painting. She knew there was something symbolic in the action. Not since the day when the Duke's buyers had taken her from the school had she felt this frightened and unsure of herself. 
    The head and the picture.
    They heightened her feelings of confusion. She shuddered, glanced at the slit windows high overhead. It was still early afternoon here, and in these latitudes the sky looked black and cold -- so much darker than the warm blue of Caladan. A pang of homesickness throbbed through her. 
    So far away, Caladan. 
    "Here we are!"
    The voice was Duke Leto's.
    She whirled, saw him striding from the arched passage to the dining hall. His black working uniform with red armorial hawk crest at the breast looked dusty and rumpled.
    "I thought you might have lost yourself in this hideous place," he said.
    "It is a cold house," she said. She looked at his tallness, at the dark skin that made her think of olive groves and golden sun on blue waters. There was woodsmoke in the gray of his eyes, but the face was predatory: thin, full of sharp angles and planes.
    A sudden fear of him tightened her breast. He had become such a savage, driving person since the decision to bow to the Emperor's command.
    "The whole city feels cold," she said.
    "It's a dirty, dusty little garrison town," he agreed. "But we'll change that." He looked around the hall. "These are public rooms for state occasions. I've just glanced at some of the family apartments in the south wing. They're much nicer." He stepped closer, touched her arm, admiring her stateliness.
    And again, he wondered at her unknown ancestry -- a renegade House, perhaps? Some black-barred royalty? She looked more regal than the Emperor's own blood.
    Under the pressure of his stare, she turned half away, exposing her profile. And he realized there was no single and precise thing that brought her beauty to focus. The face was oval under a cap of hair the color of polished bronze. Her eyes were set wide, as green and clear as the morning skies of Caladan. The nose was small, the mouth wide and generous. Her figure was good but scant: tall and with its curves gone to slimness.
    He remembered that the lay sisters at the school had called her skinny, so his buyers had told him. But that description oversimplified. She had brought a regal beauty back into the Atreides line. He was glad that Paul favored her. 
    "Where's Paul?" he asked.
    "Someplace around the house taking his lessons with Yueh." 
    "Probably in the south wing," he said. "I thought I heard Yueh's voice, but I couldn't take time to look." He glanced down at her, hesitating. "I came here only to hang the key of Caladan Castle in the dining hall."
    She caught her breath, stopped the impulse to reach out to him. Hanging the key -- there was finality in that action. But this was not the time or place for comforting. "I saw our banner over the house as we came in," she said.
    He glanced at the painting of his father. "Where were you going to hang that?" 
    "Somewhere in here."
    "No." The word rang flat and final, telling her she could use trickery to persuade, but open argument was useless. Still, she had to try, even if the gesture served only to remind herself that she would not trick him.
    "My Lord," she said, "if you'd only . . . "
    "The answer remains no. I indulge you shamefully in most things, not in this. I've just come from the dining hall where there are --" 
    "My Lord! Please."
    "The choice is between your digestion and my ancestral dignity, my dear," he said. "They will hang in the dining hall." 
    She sighed. "Yes, my Lord."
    "You may resume your custom of dining in your rooms whenever possible. I shall expect you at your proper position only on formal occasions." 
    "Thank you, my Lord."
    "And don't go all cold and formal on me! Be thankful that I never married you, my dear. Then it'd be your duty to join me at table for every meal." 
    She held her face immobile, nodded.
    "Hawat already has our own poison snooper over the dining table," he said. "There's a portable in your room." 
    "You anticipated this . . . disagreement," she said.
    "My dear, I think also of your comfort. I've engaged servants. They're locals, but Hawat has cleared them -- they're Fremen all. They'll do until our own people can be released from their other duties." 
    "Can anyone from this place be truly safe?"
    "Anyone who hates Harkonnens. You may even want to keep the head housekeeper: the Shadout Mapes." 
    "Shadout," Jessica said. "A Fremen title?"
    "I'm told it means 'well-dipper,' a meaning with rather important overtones here. She may not strike you as a servant type, although Hawat speaks highly of her on the basis of Duncan's report. They're convinced she wants to serve -- specifically that she wants to serve you." 
    "Me?"
    "The Fremen have learned that you're Bene Gesserit," he said. "There are legends here about the Bene Gesserit."
    The Missionaria Protectiva, Jessica thought. No place escapes them.
    "Does this mean Duncan was successful?" she asked. "Will the Fremen be our allies?"
    "There's nothing definite," he said. "They wish to observe us for a while, Duncan believes. They did, however, promise to stop raiding our outlying villages during a truce period. That's a more important gain than it might seem. Hawat tells me the Fremen were a deep thorn in the Harkonnen side, that the extent of their ravages was a carefully guarded secret. It wouldn't have helped for the Emperor to learn the ineffectiveness of the Harkonnen military." 
    "A Fremen housekeeper," Jessica mused, returning to the subject of the Shadout Mapes. "She'll have the all-blue eyes." 
    "Don't let the appearance of these people deceive you," he said. "There's a deep strength and healthy vitality in them. I think they'll be everything we need." 
    "It's a dangerous gamble," she said. 
    "Let's not go into that again," he said.
    She forced a smile. "We are committed, no doubt of that." She went through the quick regimen of calmness -- the two deep breaths, the ritual thought, then: "When I assign rooms, is there anything special I should reserve for you?"
    "You must teach me someday how you do that," he said, "the way you thrust your worries aside and turn to practical matters. It must be a Bene Gesserit thing." 
    "It's a female thing," she said.
    He smiled. "Well, assignment of rooms: make certain, I have large office space next my sleeping quarters. There'll be more paper work here than on Caladan. A guard room, of course. That should cover it. Don't worry about security of the house. Hawat's men have been over it in depth." 
    "I'm sure they have."
    He glanced at his wristwatch. "And you might see that all our timepieces are adjusted for Arrakeen local. I've assigned a tech to take care of it. He'll be along presently." He brushed a strand of her hair back from her forehead. "I must return to the landing field now. The second shuttle's due any minute with my staff reserves." 
    "Couldn't Hawat meet them, my Lord? You look so tired." 
    "The good Thufir is even busier than I am. You know this planet's infested with Harkonnen intrigues. Besides, I must try persuading some of the trained spice hunters against leaving. They have the option, you know, with the change of fief -- and this planetologist the Emperor and the Landsraad installed as Judge of the Change cannot be bought. He's allowing the opt. About eight hundred trained hands expect to go out on the spice shuttle and there's a Guild cargo ship standing by." 
    "My Lord . . . " She broke off, hesitating. 
    "Yes?"
    He will not be persuaded against trying to make this planet secure for us, she thought. And I cannot use my tricks on him. 
    "At what time will you be expecting dinner?" she asked.
    That's not what she was going to say, he thought. Ah-h-h-h, my Jessica, would that we were somewhere else, anywhere away from this terrible place -- alone, the two of us, without a care.
    "I'll eat in the officers' mess at the field," he said. "Don't expect me until very late. And . . .ah, I'll be sending a guardcar for Paul. I want him to attend our strategy conference." 
    He cleared his throat as though to say something else, then, without warning, turned and strode out, headed for the entry where she could hear more boxes being deposited. His voice sounded once from there, commanding and disdainful, the way he always spoke to servants when he was in a hurry: "The Lady Jessica's in the Great Hall. Join her there immediately." 
    The outer door slammed.
    Jessica turned away, faced the painting of Leto's father. It had been done by the famed artist, Albe, during the Old Duke's middle years. He was portrayed in matador costume with a magenta cape flung over his left arm. The face looked young, hardly older than Leto's now, and with the same hawk features, the same gray stare. She clenched her fists at her sides, glared at the painting. 
    "Damn you! Damn you! Damn you!" she whispered. 
    "What are your orders, Noble Born?" 
    It was a woman's voice, thin and stringy.
    Jessica whirled, stared down at a knobby, gray-haired woman in a shapeless sack dress of bondsman brown. The woman looked as wrinkled and desiccated as any member of the mob that had greeted them along the way from the landing field that morning. Every native she had seen on this planet, Jessica thought, looked prune dry and undernourished. Yet, Leto had said they were strong and vital. And there were the eyes, of course -- that wash of deepest, darkest blue without any white -- secretive, mysterious. Jessica forced herself not to stare.
    The woman gave a stiff-necked nod, said: "I am called the Shadout Mapes, Noble Born. What are your orders?"
    "You may refer to me as 'my Lady,' " Jessica said. "I'm not noble born. I'm the bound concubine of the Duke Leto." 
    Again that strange nod, and the woman peered upward at Jessica with a sly questioning, "There's a wife, then?"
    "There is not, nor has there ever been. I am the Duke's only . . . companion, the mother of his heir-designate."
    Even as she spoke, Jessica laughed inwardly at the pride behind her words. What was it St. Augustine said? she asked herself. "The mind commands the body and it obeys. The mind orders itself and meets resistance." Yes -- I am meeting more resistance lately. I could use a quiet retreat by myself.
    A weird cry sounded from the road outside the house. It was repeated: "Soo-soo-Sook! Soo-soo-Sook!" Then: "Ikhut-eigh! Ikhut-eigh!" And again: "Soo-soo-Sook!"
    "What is that?" Jessica asked. "I heard it several times as we drove through the streets this morning."
    "Only a water-seller, my Lady. But you've no need to interest yourself in such as they. The cistern here holds fifty thousand liters and it's always kept full." She glanced down at her dress. "Why, you know, my Lady, I don't even have to wear my stillsuit here?" She cackled. "And me not even dead!"
    Jessica hesitated, wanting to question this Fremen woman, needing data to guide her. But bringing order of the confusion in the castle was more imperative. Still, she found the thought unsettling that water was a major mark of wealth here.
    "My husband told me of your title, Shadout," Jessica said. "I recognized the word. It's a very ancient word."
    "You know the ancient tongues then?" Mapes asked, and she waited with an odd intensity.
    "Tongues are the Bene Gesserit's first learning," Jessica said. "I know the Bhotani Jib and the Chakobsa, all the hunting languages." 
    Mapes nodded. "Just as the legend says."
    And Jessica wondered: Why do I play out this sham? But the Bene Gesserit ways were devious and compelling.
    "I know the Dark Things and the ways of the Great Mother," Jessica said. She read the more obvious signs in Mapes' actions and appearance, the petit betrayals. "Miseces prejia," she said in the Chakobsa tongue. "Andral t're pera! Trada cik buscakri miseces perakri --" 
    Mapes took a backward step, appeared poised to flee. 
    "I know many things." Jessica said. "I know that you have borne children, that you have lost loved ones, that you have hidden in fear and that you have done violence and will yet do more violence. I know many things." 
    In a low voice, Mapes said: "I meant no offense, my Lady." 
    "You speak of the legend and seek answers," Jessica said. "Beware the answers you may find. I know you came prepared for violence with a weapon in your bodice." 
    "My Lady, I . . . "
    "There's a remote possibility you could draw my life's blood," Jessica said, "but in so doing you'd bring down more ruin than your wildest fears could imagine. There are worse things than dying, you know -- even for an entire people."
    "My Lady!" Mapes pleaded. She appeared about to fall to her knees. "The weapon was sent as a gift to you should you prove to be the One."
    "And as the means of my death should I prove otherwise," Jessica said. She waited in the seeming relaxation that made the Bene Gesserit-trained so terrifying in combat. 
    Now we see which way the decision tips, she thought.
    Slowly, Mapes reached into the neck of her dress, brought out a dark sheath. A black handle with deep finger ridges protruded from it. She took sheath in one hand and handle in the other, withdrew a milk-white blade, held it up. The blade seemed to shine and glitter with a light of its own. It was double-edged like a kindjal and the blade was perhaps twenty centimeters long. 
    "Do you know this, my Lady?" Mapes asked.
    It could only be one thing, Jessica knew, the fabled crysknife of Arrakis, the blade that had never been taken off the planet, and was known only by rumor and wild gossip. 
    "It's a crysknife," she said.
    "Say it not lightly," Mapes said. "Do you know its meaning?" 
    And Jessica thought: There was an edge to that question. Here's the reason this Fremen has taken service with me, to ask that one question. My answer could precipitate violence or . . . what? She seeks an answer from me: the meaning of a knife. She's called the Shadow in the Chakobsa tongue. Knife, that's "Death Maker" in Chakobsa. She's getting restive. I must answer now. Delay is as dangerous as the wrong answer. 
    Jessica said: "It's a maker --"
    "Eighe-e-e-e-e-e!" Mapes wailed. It was a sound of both grief and elation. She trembled so hard the knife blade sent glittering shards of reflection shooting around the room.
    Jessica waited, poised. She had intended to say the knife was a maker of death and then add the ancient word, but every sense warned her now, all the deep training of alertness that exposed meaning in the most casual muscle twitch. 
    The key word was . . . maker.
    Maker? Maker.
    Still, Mapes held the knife as though ready to use it.
    Jessica said: "Did you think that I, knowing the mysteries of the Great Mother, would not know the Maker?"
    Mapes lowered the knife. "My Lady, when one has lived with prophecy for so long, the moment of revelation is a shock." 
    Jessica thought about the prophecy -- the Shari-a and all the panoplia propheticus, a Bene Gesserit of the Missionaria Protectiva dropped here long centuries ago -- long dead, no doubt, but her purpose accomplished: the protective legends implanted in these people against the day of a Bene Gesserit's need. 
    Well, that day had come.
    Mapes returned knife to sheath, said: "This is an unfixed blade, my Lady. Keep it near you. More than a week away from flesh and it begins to disintegrate. It's yours, a tooth of shai-hulud, for as long as you live."
    Jessica reached out her right hand, risked a gamble: "Mapes, you've sheathed that blade unblooded."
    With a gasp, Mapes dropped the sheathed knife into Jessica's hand, tore open the brown bodice, wailing: "Take the water of my life!"
    Jessica withdrew the blade from its sheath. How it glittered! She directed the point toward Mapes, saw a fear greater than death-panic come over the woman. Poison in the point? Jessica wondered. She tipped up the point, drew a delicate scratch with the blade's edge above Mapes' left breast. There was a thick welling of blood that stopped almost immediately. Ultrafast coagulation, Jessica thought. A moisture-conserving mutation?
    She sheathed the blade, said: "Button your dress, Mapes." 
    Mapes obeyed, trembling. The eyes without whites stared at Jessica. "You are ours," she muttered. "You are the One." 
    There came another sound of unloading in the entry. Swiftly, Mapes grabbed the sheathed knife, concealed it in Jessica's bodice. "Who sees that knife must be cleansed or slain!" she snarled. "You know that, my Lady!" 
    I know it now, Jessica thought.
    The cargo handlers left without intruding on the Great Hall.
    Mapes composed herself, said: "The uncleansed who have seen a crysknife may not leave Arrakis alive. Never forget that, my Lady. You've been entrusted with a crysknife." She took a deep breath. "Now the thing must take its course. It cannot be hurried." She glanced at the stacked boxes and piled goods around them. "And there's work aplenty to while the time for us here." 
    Jessica hesitated. "The thing must take its course." That was a specific catchphrase from the Missionaria Protectiva's stock of incantations -- The coming of the Reverend Mother to free you.
    But I'm not a Reverend Mother, Jessica thought. And then: Great Mother! They planted that one here! This must be a hideous place!
    In matter-of-fact tones, Mapes said: "What'll you be wanting me to do first, my Lady?"
    Instinct warned Jessica to match that casual tone. She said: "The painting of the Old Duke over there, it must be hung on one side of the dining hall. The bull's head must go on the wall opposite the painting."
    Mapes crossed to the bull's head. "What a great beast it must have been to carry such a head," she said. She stooped. "I'll have to be cleaning this first, won't I, my Lady?" 
    "No." 
    "But there's dirt caked on its horns."
    "That's not dirt, Mapes. That's the blood of our Duke's father. Those horns were sprayed with a transparent fixative within hours after this beast killed the Old Duke." 
    Mapes stood up. "Ah, now!" she said.
    "It's just blood," Jessica said. "Old blood at that. Get some help hanging these now. The beastly things are heavy."
    "Did you think the blood bothered me?" Mapes asked. "I'm of the desert and I've seen blood aplenty." 
    "I . . . see that you have," Jessica said.
    "And some of it my own," Mapes said. "More'n you drew with your puny scratch." 
    "You'd rather I'd cut deeper?"
    "Ah, no! The body's water is scant enough 'thout gushing a wasteful lot of it into the air. You did the thing right." 
    And Jessica, noting the words and manner, caught the deeper implications in the phrase, 'the body's water.' Again she felt a sense of oppression at the importance of water on Arrakis.
    "On which side of the dining hall shall I hang which one of these pretties, my Lady?" Mapes asked.
    Ever the practical one, this Mapes, Jessica thought. She said: "Use your own judgment, Mapes. It makes no real difference." 
    "As you say, my Lady." Mapes stooped, began clearing wrappings and twine from the head. "Killed an old duke, did you?" she crooned.
    "Shall I summon a handler to help you?" Jessica asked. 
    "I'll manage, my Lady."
    Yes, she'll manage, Jessica thought. There's that about this Fremen creature: the drive to manage.
    Jessica felt the cold sheath of the crysknife beneath her bodice, thought of the long chain of Bene Gesserit scheming that had forged another link here. Because of that scheming, she had survived a deadly crisis. "It cannot be hurried," Mapes had said. Yet there was a tempo of headlong rushing to this place that filled Jessica with foreboding. And not all the preparations of the Missionaria Protectiva nor Hawat's suspicious inspection of this castellated pile of rocks could dispel the feeling.
    "When you've finished hanging those, start unpacking the boxes," Jessica said. "One of the cargo men at the entry has all the keys and knows where things should go. Get the keys and the list from him. If there are any questions I'll be in the south wing." 
    "As you will, my Lady," Mapes said.
    Jessica turned away, thinking: Hawat may have passed this residency as safe, but there's something wrong about the place. I can feel it.
    An urgent need to see her son gripped Jessica. She began walking toward the arched doorway that led into the passage to the dining hall and the family wings. Faster and faster she walked until she was almost running.
    Behind her, Mapes paused in clearing the wrappings from the bull's head, looked at the retreating back. "She's the One all right," she muttered. "Poor thing."

= = = = = =

"Yueh! Yueh! Yueh!" goes the refrain. "A million deaths were not enough for Yueh!"
-from "A Child's History of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    The door stood ajar, and Jessica stepped through it into a room with yellow walls. To her left stretched a low settee of black hide and two empty bookcases, a hanging waterflask with dust on its bulging sides. To her right, bracketing another door, stood more empty bookcases, a desk from Caladan and three chairs. At the windows directly ahead of her stood Dr. Yueh, his back to her, his attention fixed upon the outside world. 
    Jessica took another silent step into the room.
    She saw that Yueh's coat was wrinkled, a white smudge near the left elbow as though he had leaned against chalk. He looked, from behind, like a fleshless stick figure in overlarge black clothing, a caricature poised for stringy movement at the direction of a puppet master. Only the squarish block of head with long ebony hair caught in its silver Suk School ring at the shoulder seemed alive--turning slightly to follow some movement outside.
    Again, she glanced around the room, seeing no sign of her son, but the closed door on her right, she knew, let into a small bedroom for which Paul had expressed a liking.
    "Good afternoon. Dr. Yueh," she said. "Where's Paul?" 
    He nodded as though to something out the window, spoke in an absent manner without turning: "Your son grew tired, Jessica. I sent him into the next room to rest."
    Abruptly, he stiffened, whirled with mustache flopping over his purpled lips. "Forgive me, my Lady! My thoughts were far away . . . I . . . did not mean to be familiar."
    She smiled, held out her right hand. For a moment, she was afraid he might kneel. "Wellington, please." 
    "To use your name like that . . . I . . . "
    "We've known each other six years," she said. "It's long past time formalities should've been dropped between us--in private." 
    Yueh ventured a thin smile, thinking: I believe it has worked. Now, she'll think anything unusual in my manner is due to embarrassment. She'll not look for deeper reasons when she believes she already knows the answer.
    "I'm afraid I was woolgathering," he said. "Whenever I . . . feel especially sorry for you. I'm afraid I think of you as . . . well, Jessica." 
    "Sorry for me? Whatever for?"
    Yueh shrugged. Long ago, he had realized Jessica was not gifted with the full Truthsay as his Wanna had been. Still, he always used the truth with Jessica whenever possible. It was safest.
    "You've seen this place, my . . . Jessica." He stumbled over the name, plunged ahead: "So barren after Caladan. And the people! Those townswomen we passed on the way here wailing beneath their veils. The way they looked at us."
    She folded her arms across her breast, hugging herself, feeling the crysknife there, a blade ground from a sandworm's tooth, if the reports were right. "It's just that we're strange to them--different people, different customs. They've known only the Harkonnens." She looked past him out the windows. "What were you staring at out there?" 
    He turned back to the window. "The people." 
    Jessica crossed to his side, looked to the left toward the front of the house where Yueh's attention was focused. A line of twenty palm trees grew there, the ground beneath them swept clean, barren. A screen fence separated them from the road upon which robed people were passing. Jessica detected a faint shimmering in the air between her and the people--a house shield--and went on to study the passing throng, wondering why Yueh found them so absorbing.
    The pattern emerged and she put a hand to her cheek. The way the passing people looked at the palm trees! She saw envy, some hate . . . even a sense of hope. Each person raked those trees with a fixity of expression.
    "Do you know what they're thinking?" Yueh asked. 
    "You profess to read minds?" she asked.
    "Those minds," he said. "They look at those trees and they think; 'There are one hundred of us.' That's what they think." 
    She turned a puzzled frown on him. "Why?"
    "Those are date palms," he said. "One date palm requires forty liters of water a day. A man requires but eight liters. A palm, then, equals five men. There are twenty palms out there--one hundred men." 
    "But some of those people look at the trees hopefully." 
    "They but hope some dates will fall, except it's the wrong season."
    "We look at this place with too critical an eye," she said. "There's hope as well as danger here. The spice could make us rich. With a fat treasury, we can make this world into whatever we wish."
    And she laughed silently at herself: Who am I trying to convince? The laugh broke through her restraints, emerging brittle, without humor. "But you can't buy security," she said.
    Yueh turned away to hide his face from her. If only it were possible to hate these people instead of love them! In her manner, in many ways, Jessica was like his Wanna. Yet that thought carried its own rigors, hardening him to his purpose. The ways of the Harkonnen cruelty were devious. Wanna might not be dead. He had to be certain.
    "Do not worry for us, Wellington," Jessica said. "The problem's ours, not yours."
    She thinks I worry for her! He blinked back tears. And I do, of course. But I must stand before that black Baron with his deed accomplished, and take my one chance to strike him where he is weakest--in his gloating moment! 
    He sighed.
    "Would it disturb Paul if I looked in on him?" she asked. 
    "Not at all. I gave him a sedative." 
    "He's taking the change well?" she asked.
    "Except for getting a bit overtired. He's excited, but what fifteen-year-old wouldn't be under these circumstances?" He crossed to the door, opened it. "He's in here." 
    Jessica followed, peered into a shadowy room.
    Paul lay on a narrow cot, one arm beneath a light cover, the other thrown back over his head. Slatted blinds at a window beside the bed wove a loom of shadows across face and blanket.
    Jessica stared at her son, seeing the oval shape of face so like her own. But the hair was the Duke's--coal-colored and tousled. Long lashes concealed the lime-toned eyes. Jessica smiled, feeling her fears retreat. She was suddenly caught by the idea of genetic traces in her son's features--her lines in eyes and facial outline, but sharp touches of the father peering through that outline like maturity emerging from childhood.
    She thought of the boy's features as an exquisite distillation out of random patterns--endless queues of happenstance meeting at this nexus. The thought made her want to kneel beside the bed and take her son in her arms, but she was inhibited by Yueh's presence. She stepped back, closed the door softly.
    Yueh had returned to the window, unable to bear watching the way Jessica stared at her son. Why did Wanna never give me children? he asked himself. I know as a doctor there was no physical reason against it. Was there some Bene Gesserit reason? Was she, perhaps, instructed to serve a different purpose? What could it have been? She loved me, certainly.
    For the first time, he was caught up in the thought that he might be part of a pattern more involuted and complicated than his mind could grasp.
    Jessica stopped beside him, said: "What delicious abandon in the sleep of a child." 
    He spoke mechanically: "If only adults could relax like that." 
    "Yes." 
    "Where do we lose it?" he murmured.
    She glanced at him, catching the odd tone, but her mind was still on Paul, thinking of the new rigors in his training here, thinking of the differences in his life now--so very different from the life they once had planned for him.
    "We do, indeed, lose something," she said.
    She glanced out to the right at a slope humped with a wind-troubled gray-green of bushes--dusty leaves and dry claw branches. The too-dark sky hung over the slope like a blot, and the milky light of the Arrakeen sun gave the scene a silver cast--light like the crysknife concealed in her bodice. 
    "The sky's so dark," she said.
    "That's partly the lack of moisture," he said.
    "Water!" she snapped. "Everywhere you turn here, you're involved with the lack of water!" 
    "It's the precious mystery of Arrakis," he said.
    "Why is there so little of it? There's volcanic rock here. There're a dozen power sources I could name. There's polar ice. They say you can't drill in the desert--storms and sandtides destroy equipment faster than it can be installed, if the worms don't get you first. They've never found water traces there, anyway. But the mystery, Wellington, the real mystery is the wells that've been drilled up here in the sinks and basins. Have you read about those?" 
    "First a trickle, then nothing," he said.
    "But, Wellington, that's the mystery. The water was there. It dries up. And never again is there water. Yet another hole nearby produces the same result: a trickle that stops. Has no one ever been curious about this?"
    "It is curious," he said. "You suspect some living agency? Wouldn't that have shown in core samples?"
    "What would have shown? Alien plant matter . . . or animal? Who could recognize it?" She turned back to the slope. "The water is stopped. Something plugs it. That's my suspicion." 
    "Perhaps the reason's known," he said. "The Harkonnens sealed off many sources of information about Arrakis. Perhaps there was reason to suppress this."
    "What reason?" she asked. "And then there's the atmospheric moisture. Little enough of it, certainly, but there's some. It's the major source of water here, caught in windtraps and precipitators. Where does that come from?" 
    "The polar caps?"
    "Cold air takes up little moisture, Wellington. There are things here behind the Harkonnen veil that bear close investigation, and not all of those things are directly involved with the spice."
    "We are indeed behind the Harkonnen veil," he said. "Perhaps we'll . . . " He broke off, noting the sudden intense way she was looking at him. "Is something wrong?"
    "The way you say 'Harkonnen,' " she said. "Even my Duke's voice doesn't carry that weight of venom when he uses the hated name. I didn't know you had personal reasons to hate them, Wellington."
    Great Mother! he thought. I've aroused her suspicions! Now I must use every trick my Wanna taught me. There's only one solution: tell the truth as far as I can.
    He said: "You didn't know that my wife, my Wanna . . . " He shrugged, unable to speak past a sudden constriction in his throat. Then: "They . . . " The words would not come out. He felt panic, closed his eyes tightly, experiencing the agony in his chest and little else until a hand touched his arm gently.
    "Forgive me," Jessica said. "I did not mean to open an old wound." And she thought: Those animals! His wife was Bene Gesserit--the signs are all over him. And it's obvious the Harkonnens killed her. Here's another poor victim bound to the Atreides by a cherem of hate.
    "I am sorry," he said. "I'm unable to talk about it." He opened his eyes, giving himself up to the internal awareness of grief. That, at least, was truth.
    Jessica studied him, seeing the up-angled cheeks, the dark sequins of almond eyes, the butter complexion, and stringy mustache hanging like a curved frame around purpled lips and narrow chin. The creases of his cheeks and forehead, she saw, were as much lines of sorrow as of age. A deep affection for him came over her.
    "Wellington, I'm sorry we brought you into this dangerous place," she said.
    "I came willingly," he said. And that, too, was true.
    "But this whole planet's a Harkonnen trap. You must know that."
    "It will take more than a trap to catch the Duke Leto," he said. And that, too, was true.
    "Perhaps I should be more confident of him," she said. "He is a brilliant tactician." 
    "We've been uprooted," he said. "That's why we're uneasy." 
    "And how easy it is to kill the uprooted plant," she said. "Especially when you put it down in hostile soil." 
    "Are we certain the soil's hostile?"
    "There were water riots when it was learned how many people the Duke was adding to the population," she said. "They stopped only when the people learned we were installing new windtraps and condensers to take care of the load."
    "There is only so much water to support human life here," he said. "The people know if more come to drink a limited amount of water, the price goes up and the very poor die. But the Duke has solved this. It doesn't follow that the riots mean permanent hostility toward him."
    "And guards," she said. "Guards everywhere. And shields. You see the blurring of them everywhere you look. We did not live this way on Caladan." 
    "Give this planet a chance," he said.
    But Jessica continued to stare hard-eyed out the window. "I can smell death in this place," she said. "Hawat sent advance agents in here by the battalion. Those guards outside are his men. The cargo handlers are his men. There've been unexplained withdrawals of large sums from the treasury. The amounts mean only one thing: bribes in high places." She shook her head. "Where Thufir Hawat goes, death and deceit follow." 
    "You malign him."
    "Malign? I praise him. Death and deceit are our only hopes now. I just do not fool myself about Thufir's methods." 
    "You should . . . keep busy," he said. "Give yourself no time for such morbid--"
    "Busy! What is it that takes most of my time, Wellington? I am the Duke's secretary--so busy that each day I learn new things to fear . . . things even he doesn't suspect I know." She compressed her lips, spoke thinly: "Sometimes I wonder how much my Bene Gesserit business training figured in his choice of me." 
    "What do you mean?" He found himself caught by the cynical tone, the bitterness that he had never seen her expose.
    "Don't you think, Wellington," she asked, "that a secretary bound to one by love is so much safer?" 
    "That is not a worthy thought, Jessica."
    The rebuke came naturally to his lips. There was no doubt how the Duke felt about his concubine. One had only to watch him as he followed her with his eyes.
    She sighed. "You're right. It's not worthy."
    Again, she hugged herself, pressing the sheathed crysknife against her flesh and thinking of the unfinished business it represented.
    "There'll be much bloodshed soon," she said. "The Harkonnens won't rest until they're dead or my Duke destroyed. The Baron cannot forget that Leto is a cousin of the royal blood--no matter what the distance--while the Harkonnen titles came out of the CHOAM pocketbook. But the poison in him, deep in his mind, is the knowledge that an Atreides had a Harkonnen banished for cowardice after, the Battle of Corrin."
    "The old feud," Yueh muttered. And for a moment he felt an acid touch of hate. The old feud had trapped him in its web, killed his Wanna or--worse--left her for Harkonnen tortures until her husband did their bidding. The old feud had trapped him and these people were part of that poisonous thing. The irony was that such deadliness should come to flower here on Arrakis, the one source in the universe of melange, the prolonger of life, the giver of health.
    "What are you thinking?" she asked.
    "I am thinking that the spice brings six hundred and twenty thousand Solaris the decagram on the open market right now. That is wealth to buy many things." 
    "Does greed touch even you, Wellington?" 
    "Not greed." 
    "What then?"
    He shrugged. "Futility." He glanced at her. "Can you remember your first taste of spice?" 
    "It tasted like cinnamon."
    "But never twice the same," he said. "It's like life--it presents a different face each time you take it. Some hold that the spice produces a learned-flavor reaction. The body, learning a thing is good for it, interprets the flavor as pleasurable--slightly euphoric. And, like life, never to be truly synthesized."
    "I think it would've been wiser for us to go renegade, to take ourselves beyond the Imperial reach," she said.
    He saw that she hadn't been listening to him, focused on her words, wondering: Yes--why didn't she make him do this? She could make him do virtually anything.
    He spoke quickly because here was truth and a change of subject: "Would you think it bold of me . . . Jessica, if I asked a personal question?"
    She pressed against the window ledge in an unexplainable pang of disquiet. "Of course not. You're . . . my friend." 
    "Why haven't you made the Duke marry you?" 
    She whirled, head up, glaring. "Made him marry me? But--" 
    "I should not have asked," he said.
    "No." She shrugged. "There's good political reason--as long as my Duke remains unmarried some of the Great Houses can still hope for alliance. And . . . " She sighed. " . . . motivating people, forcing them to your will, gives you a cynical attitude toward humanity. It degrades everything it touches. If I made him do . . . this, then it would not be his doing."
    "It's a thing my Wanna might have said," he murmured. And this, too, was truth. He put a hand to his mouth, swallowing convulsively. He had never been closer to speaking out, confessing his secret role.
    Jessica spoke, shattering the moment. "Besides, Wellington, the Duke is really two men. One of them I love very much. He's charming, witty, considerate . . . tender--everything a woman could desire. But the other man is . . . cold, callous, demanding, selfish--as harsh and cruel as a winter wind. That's the man shaped by the father." Her face contorted. "If only that old man had died when my Duke was born!"
    In the silence that came between them, a breeze from a ventilator could be heard fingering the blinds.
    Presently, she took a deep breath, said, "Leto's right--these rooms are nicer than the ones in the other sections of the house." She turned, sweeping the room with her gaze. "If you'll excuse me, Wellington, I want another look through this wing before I assign quarters."
    He nodded. "Of course." And he thought: if only there were some way not to do this thing that I must do.
    Jessica dropped her arms, crossed to the hall door and stood there a moment, hesitating, then let herself out. All the time we talked he was hiding something, holding something back, she thought. To save my feelings, no doubt. He's a good man. Again, she hesitated, almost turned back to confront Yueh and drag the hidden thing from him. But that would only shame him, frighten him to learn he's so easily read. I should place more trust in my friends.

= = = = = =

Many have marked the speed with which Muad'Dib learned the necessities of Arrakis. The Bene Gesserit, of course, know the basis of this speed. For the others, we can say that Muad'Dib learned rapidly because his first training was in how to learn. And the first lesson of all was the basic trust that he could learn. It is shocking to find how many people do not believe they can learn, and how many more believe learning to be difficult. Muad'Dib knew that every experience carries its lesson.
-from "The Humanity of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul lay on the bed feigning sleep. It had been easy to palm Dr. Yueh's sleeping tablet, to pretend to swallow it. Paul suppressed a laugh. Even his mother had believed him asleep. He had wanted to jump up and ask her permission to go exploring the house, but had realized she wouldn't approve. Things were too unsettled yet. No. This way was best.
    If I slip out without asking I haven't disobeyed orders. And I will stay in the house where it's safe.
    He heard his mother and Yueh talking in the other room. Their words were indistinct--something about the spice . . . the Harkonnens. The conversation rose and fell.
    Paul's attention went to the carved headboard of his bed--a false headboard attached to the wall and concealing the controls for this room's functions. A leaping fish had been shaped on the wood with thick brown waves beneath it. He knew if he pushed the fish's one visible eye that would turn on the room's suspensor lamps. One of the waves, when twisted, controlled ventilation. Another changed the temperature.
    Quietly, Paul sat up in bed. A tall bookcase stood against the wall to his left. It could be swung aside to reveal a closet with drawers along one side. The handle on the door into the hall was patterned on an ornithopter thrust bar.
    It was as though the room had been designed to entice him. 
    The room and this planet.
    He thought of the filmbook Yueh had shown him--"Arrakis: His Imperial Majesty's Desert Botanical Testing Station." It was an old filmbook from before discovery of the spice. Names flitted through Paul's mind, each with its picture imprinted by the book's mnemonic pulse: saguaro, burro bush, date palm, sand verbena, evening primrose, barrel cactus, incense bush, smoke tree, creosote bush . . . kit fox, desert hawk, kangaroo mouse . . . 
    Names and pictures, names and pictures from man's terranic past--and many to be found now nowhere else in the universe except here on Arrakis.
    So many new things to learn about--the spice. 
    And the sandworms.
    A door closed in the other room. Paul heard his mother's footsteps retreating down the hall. Dr. Yueh, he knew, would find something to read and remain in the other room. 
    Now was the moment to go exploring.
    Paul slipped out of the bed, headed for the bookcase door that opened into the closet. He stopped at a sound behind him, turned. The carved headboard of the bed was folding down onto the spot where he had been sleeping. Paul froze, and immobility saved his life.
    From behind the headboard slipped a tiny hunter-seeker no more than five centimeters long. Paul recognized it at once--a common assassination weapon that every child of royal blood learned about at an early age. It was a ravening sliver of metal guided by some near-by hand and eye. It could burrow into moving flesh and chew its way up nerve channels to the nearest vital organ. 
    The seeker lifted, swung sideways across the room and back.
    Through Paul's mind flashed the related knowledge, the hunter-seeker limitations: Its compressed suspensor field distorted the vision of its transmitter eye. With nothing but the dim light of the room to reflect his target, the operator would be relying on motion--anything that moved. A shield could slow a hunter, give time to destroy it, but Paul had put aside his shield on the bed. Lasguns would knock them down, but lasguns were expensive and notoriously cranky of maintenance--and there was always the peril of explosive pyrotechnics if the laser beam intersected a hot shield. The Atreides relied on their body shields and their wits.
    Now, Paul held himself in near catatonic immobility, knowing he had only his wits to meet this threat.
    The hunter-seeker lifted another half meter. It rippled through the slatted light from the window blinds, back and forth, quartering the room.
    I must try to grab it, he thought. The suspensor field will make it slippery on the bottom. I must grip tightly.
    The thing dropped a half meter, quartered to the left, circled back around the bed. A faint humming could be heard from it.
    Who is operating that thing? Paul wondered. It has to be someone near. I could shout for Yueh, but it would take him the instant the door opened.
    The hall door behind Paul creaked. A rap sounded there. The door opened.
    The hunter-seeker arrowed past his head toward the motion.
    Paul's right hand shot out and down, gripping the deadly thing. It hummed and twisted in his hand, but his muscles were locked on it in desperation. With a violent turn and thrust, he slammed the thing's nose against the metal doorplate. He felt the crunch of it as the nose eye smashed and the seeker went dead in his hand. 
    Still, he held it--to be certain.
    Paul's eyes came up, met the open stare of total blue from the Shadout Mapes.
    "Your father has sent for you," she said. "There are men in the hall to escort you."
    Paul nodded, his eyes and awareness focusing on this odd woman in a sack-like dress of bondsman brown. She was looking now at the thing clutched in his hand.
    "I've heard of suchlike," she said. "It would've killed me, not so?" 
    He had to swallow before he could speak. "I . . . was its target." 
    "But it was coming for me."
    "Because you were moving." And he wondered: Who is this creature?
    "Then you saved my life," she said. 
    "I saved both our lives."
    "Seems like you could've let it have me and made your own escape," she said.
    "Who are you?" he asked.
    "The Shadout Mapes, housekeeper." 
    "How did you know where to find me?"
    "Your mother told me. I met her at the stairs to the weirding room down the hall." She pointed to her right. "Your father's men are still waiting."
    Those will be Hawat's men, he thought. We must find the operator of this thing.
    "Go to my father's men," he said. "Tell them I've caught a hunter-seeker in the house and they're to spread out and find the operator. Tell them to seal off the house and its grounds immediately. They'll know how to go about it. The operator's sure to be a stranger among us."
    And he wondered: Could it be this creature? But he knew it wasn't. The seeker had been under control when she entered.
    "Before I do your bidding, manling," Mapes said, "I must cleanse the way between us. You've put a water burden on me that I'm not sure I care to support. But we Fremen pay our debts--be they black debts or white debts. And it's known to us that you've a traitor in your midst. Who it is, we cannot say, but we're certain sure of it. Mayhap there's the hand guided that flesh-cutter." 
    Paul absorbed this in silence: a traitor. Before he could speak, the odd woman whirled away and ran back toward the entry.
    He thought to call her back, but there was an air about her that told him she would resent it. She'd told him what she knew and now she was going to do his bidding. The house would be swarming with Hawat's men in a minute.
    His mind went to other parts of that strange conversation: weirding room. He looked to his left where she had pointed. We Fremen. So that was a Fremen. He paused for the mnemonic blink that would store the pattern of her face in his memory--prune-wrinkled features darkly browned, blue-on-blue eyes without any white in them. He attached the label: The Shadout Mapes.
    Still gripping the shattered seeker, Paul turned back into his room, scooped up his shield belt from the bed with his left hand, swung it around his waist and buckled it as he ran back out and down the hall to the left.
    She'd said his mother was someplace down here--stairs . . . a weirding room.

= = = = = =

What had the Lady Jessica to sustain her in her time of trial? Think you carefully on this Bene Gesserit proverb and perhaps you will see: "Any road followed precisely to its end leads precisely nowhere. Climb the mountain just a little bit to test that it's a mountain. From the top of the mountain, you cannot see the mountain."
-from "Muad'Dib: Family Commentaries" by the Princess Irulan

    At the end of the south wing, Jessica found a metal stair spiraling up to an oval door. She glanced back down the hall, again up at the door.
    Oval? she wondered. What an odd shape for a door in a house.
    Through the windows beneath the spiral stair she could see the great white sun of Arrakis moving on toward evening. Long shadows stabbed down the hall. She returned her attention to the stairs. Harsh sidelighting picked out bits of dried earth on the open metalwork of the steps.
    Jessica put a hand on the rail, began to climb. The rail felt cold under her sliding palm. She stopped at the door, saw it had no handle, but there was a faint depression on the surface of it where a handle should have been.
    Surely not a palm lock, she told herself. A palm lock must be keyed to one individual's hand shape and palm lines. But it looked like a palm lock. And there were ways to open any palm lock--as she had learned at school.
    Jessica glanced back to make certain she was unobserved, placed her palm against the depression in the door. The most gentle of pressures to distort the lines--a turn of the wrist, another turn, a sliding twist of the palm across the surface. 
    She felt the click.
    But there were hurrying footsteps in the hall beneath her. Jessica lifted her hand from the door, turned, saw Mapes come to the foot of the stairs.
    "There are men in the great hall say they've been sent by the Duke to get young master Paul," Mapes said. "They've the ducal signet and the guard has identified them." She glanced at the door, back to Jessica.
    A cautious one, this Mapes, Jessica thought. That's a good sign.
    "He's in the fifth room from this end of the hall, the small bedroom," Jessica said. "If you have trouble waking him, call on Dr. Yueh in the next room. Paul may require a wakeshot." 
    Again, Mapes cast a piercing stare at the oval door, and Jessica thought she detected loathing in the expression. Before Jessica could ask about the door and what it concealed, Mapes had turned away, hurrying back down the hall.
    Hawat certified this place, Jessica thought. There can't be anything too terrible in here.
    She pushed the door. It swung inward onto a small room with another oval door opposite. The other door had a wheel handle.
    An airlock! Jessica thought. She glanced down, saw a door prop fallen to the floor of the little room. The prop carried Hawat's personal mark. The door was left propped open, she thought. Someone probably knocked the prop down accidentally, not realizing the outer door would close on a palm lock. 
    She stepped over the lip into the little room.
    Why an airlock in a house? she asked herself. And she thought suddenly of exotic creatures sealed off in special climates. 
    Special climate!
    That would make sense on Arrakis where even the driest of off-planet growing things had to be irrigated.
    The door behind her began swinging closed. She caught it and propped it open securely with the stick Hawat had left. Again, she faced the wheel-locked inner door, seeing now a faint inscription etched in the metal above the handle. She recognized Galach words, read:
    "O, Man! Here is a lovely portion of God's Creation; then, stand before it and learn to love the perfection of Thy Supreme Friend." 
    Jessica put her weight on the wheel. It turned left and the inner door opened. A gentle draft feathered her cheek, stirred her hair. She felt change in the air, a richer taste. She swung the door wide, looked through into massed greenery with yellow sunlight pouring across it.
    A yellow sun? she asked herself. Then: Filter glass! 
    She stepped over the sill and the door swung closed behind. 
    "A wet-planet conservatory," she breathed:
    Potted plants and low-pruned trees stood all about. She recognized a mimosa, a flowering quince, a sondagi, green-blossomed pleniscenta, green and white striped akarso . . . roses . . . 
    Even roses!
    She bent to breathe the fragrance of a giant pink blossom, straightened to peer around the room. 
    Rhythmic noise invaded her senses.
    She parted a jungle overlapping of leaves, looked through to the center of the room. A low fountain stood there, small with fluted lips. The rhythmic noise was a peeling, spooling arc of water falling thud-a-gallop onto the metal bowl.
    Jessica sent herself through the quick sense-clearing regimen, began a methodical inspection of the room's perimeter. It appeared to be about ten meters square. From its placement above the end of the hall and from subtle differences in construction, she guessed it had been added onto the roof of this wing long after the original building's completion.
    She stopped at the south limits of the room in front of the wide reach of filter glass, stared around. Every available space in the room was crowded with exotic wet-climate plants. Something rustled in the greenery. She tensed, then glimpsed a simple clock-set servok with pipe and hose arms. An arm lifted, sent out a fine spray of dampness that misted her cheeks. The arm retracted and she looked at what it had watered: a fern tree.
    Water everywhere in this room--on a planet where water was the most precious juice of life. Water being wasted so conspicuously that it shocked her to inner stillness.
    She glanced out at the filter-yellowed sun. It hung low on a jagged horizon above cliffs that formed part of the immense rock uplifting known as the Shield Wall.
    Filter glass, she thought. To turn a white sun into something softer and more familiar. Who could have built such a place? Leto? It would be like him to surprise me with such a gift, but there hasn't been time. And he's been busy with more serious problems.
    She recalled the report that many Arrakeen houses were sealed by airlock doors and windows to conserve and reclaim interior moisture. Leto had said it was a deliberate statement of power and wealth for this house to ignore such precautions, its doors and windows being sealed only against the omnipresent dust.
    But this room embodied a statement far more significant than the lack of waterseals on outer doors. She estimated that this pleasure room used water enough to support a thousand persons on Arrakis--possibly more.
    Jessica moved along the window, continuing to stare into the room. The move brought into view a metallic surface at table height beside the fountain and she glimpsed a white notepad and stylus there partly concealed by an overhanging fan leaf. She crossed to the table, noted Hawat's daysigns on it, studied a message written on the pad:

 "TO THE LADY JESSICA--
May this place give you as much pleasure as it has given me. Please permit the room to convey a lesson we learned from the same teachers: the proximity of a desirable thing tempts one to overindulgence. On that path lies danger.
 My kindest wishes,
 MARGOT LADY FENRING"

    Jessica nodded, remembering that Leto had referred to the Emperor's former proxy here as Count Fenring. But the hidden message of the note demanded immediate attention, couched as it was in a way to inform her the writer was another Bene Gesserit. A bitter thought touched Jessica in passing: The Count married his Lady.
    Even as this thought flicked through her mind, she was bending to seek out the hidden message. It had to be there. The visible note contained the code phrase every Bene Gesserit not bound by a School Injunction was required to give another Bene Gesserit when conditions demanded it: "On that path lies danger." 
    Jessica felt the back of the note, rubbed the surface for coded dots. Nothing. The edge of the pad came under her seeking fingers. Nothing. She replaced the pad where she had found it, feeling a sense of urgency.
    Something in the position of the pad? she wondered.
    But Hawat had been over this room, doubtless had moved the pad. She looked at the leaf above the pad. The leaf! She brushed a finger along the under surface, along the edge, along the stem. It was there! Her fingers detected the subtle coded dots, scanned them in a single passage:
    "Your son and Duke are in immediate danger. A bedroom has been designed to attract your son. The H loaded it with death traps to be discovered, leaving one that may escape detection." Jessica put down the urge to run back to Paul; the full message had to be learned. Her fingers sped over the dots; "I do not know the exact nature of the menace, but it has something to do with a bed. The threat to your Duke involves defection of a trusted companion or lieutenant. The H plan to give you as gift to a minion. To the best of my knowledge, this conservatory is safe. Forgive that I cannot tell more. My sources are few as my Count is not in the pay of the H. In haste, MF."
    Jessica thrust the leaf aside, whirled to dash back to Paul. In that instant, the airlock door slammed open. Paul jumped through it, holding something in his right hand, slammed the door behind him. He saw his mother, pushed through the leaves to her, glanced at the fountain, thrust his hand and the thing it clutched under the falling water.
    "Paul!" She grabbed his shoulder, staring at the hand. "What is that?"
    He spoke casually, but she caught the effort behind the tone: "Hunter-seeker. Caught it in my room and smashed its nose, but I want to be sure. Water should short it out." 
    "Immerse it!" she commanded. 
    He obeyed.
    Presently, she said: "Withdraw your hand. Leave the thing in the water."
    He brought out his hand, shook water from it, staring at the quiescent metal in the fountain. Jessica broke off a plant stem, prodded the deadly sliver. 
    It was dead.
    She dropped the stem into the water, looked at Paul. His eyes studied the room with a searching intensity that she recognized--the B.G. Way.
    "This place could conceal anything," he said. 
    "I've reason to believe it's safe," she said. 
    "My room was supposed to be safe, too. Hawat said--" 
    "It was a hunter-seeker," she reminded him "That means someone inside the house to operate it. Seeker control beams have a limited range. The thing could've been spirited in here after Hawat's investigation."
    But she thought of the message of the leaf: " . . . defection of a trusted companion or lieutenant." Not Hawat, surely. Oh, surely not Hawat.
    "Hawat's men are searching the house right now," he said. "That seeker almost got the old woman who came to wake me."
    "The Shadout Mapes," Jessica said, remembering the encounter at the stairs. "A summons from your father to--" 
    "That can wait," Paul said. "Why do you think this room's safe?" 
    She pointed to the note, explained about it. 
    He relaxed slightly.
    But Jessica remained inwardly tense, thinking: A hunter-seeker! Merciful Mother! It took all her training to prevent a fit of hysterical trembling.
    Paul spoke matter of factly: "It's the Harkonnens, of course. We shall have to destroy them."
    A rapping sounded at the airlock door--the code knock of one of Hawat's corps.
    "Come in," Paul called.
    The door swung wide and a tall man in Atreides uniform with a Hawat insignia on his cap leaned into the room. "There you are, sir," he said. "The housekeeper said you'd be here." He glanced around the room. "We found a cairn in the cellar and caught a man in it. He had a seeker console." 
    "I'll want to take part in the interrogation," Jessica said. 
    "Sorry, my Lady. We messed him up catching him. He died." 
    "Nothing to identify him?" she asked. 
    "We've found nothing yet, my Lady." 
    "Was he an Arrakeen native?" Paul asked. 
    Jessica nodded at the astuteness of the question.
    "He has the native look," the man said. "Put into that cairn more'n a month ago, by the look, and left there to await our coming. Stone and mortar where he came through into the cellar were untouched when we inspected the place yesterday. I'll stake my reputation on it." 
    "No one questions your thoroughness," Jessica said.
    "I question it, my Lady. We should've used sonic probes down there." 
    "I presume that's what you're doing now," Paul said. 
    "Yes, sir."
    "Send word to my father that we'll be delayed." 
    "At once, sir." He glanced at Jessica. "It's Hawat's order that under such circumstances as these the young master be guarded in a safe place." Again, his eyes swept the room. "What of this place?"
    "I've reason to believe it safe," she said. "Both Hawat and I have inspected it."
    "Then I'll mount guard outside here, m'Lady, until we've been over the house once more." He bowed, touched his cap to Paul, backed out and swung the door closed behind him.
    Paul broke the sudden silence, saying: "Had we better go over the house later ourselves? Your eyes might see things others would miss."
    "This wing was the only place I hadn't examined," she said. "I put if off to last because . . . " 
    "Because Hawat gave it his personal attention," he said. 
    She darted a quick look at his face, questioning. 
    "Do you distrust Hawat?" she asked.
    "No, but he's getting old . . . he's overworked. We could take some of the load from him."
    "That'd only shame him and impair his efficiency," she said. "A stray insect won't be able to wander into this wing after he hears about this. He'll be shamed that . . . " 
    "We must take our own measures," he said.
    "Hawat has served three generations of Atreides with honor," she said. "He deserves every respect and trust we can pay him . . . many times over."
    Paul said: "When my father is bothered by something you've done he says 'Bene Gesserit!' like a swear word." 
    "And what is it about me that bothers your father?" 
    "When you argue with him." 
    "You are not your father, Paul."
    And Paul thought: It'll worry her, but I must tell her what that Mapes woman said about a traitor among us.
    "What're you holding back?" Jessica asked. "This isn't like you, Paul." 
    He shrugged, recounted the exchange with Mapes.
    And Jessica thought of the message of the leaf. She came to sudden decision, showed Paul the leaf, told him its message.
    "My father must learn of this at once," he said. "I'll radiograph it in code and get if off."
    "No," she said. "You will wait until you can see him alone. As few as possible must learn about it."
    "Do you mean we should trust no one?"
    "There's another possibility," she said. "This message may have been meant to get to us. The people who gave it to us may believe it's true, but it may be that the only purpose was to get this message to us."
    Paul's face remained sturdily somber. "To sow distrust and suspicion in our ranks, to weaken us that way," he said.
    "You must tell your father privately and caution him about this aspect of it, " she said. 
    "I understand."
    She turned to the tall reach of filter glass, stared out to the southwest where the sun of Arrakis was sinking--a yellowed ball above the cliffs.
    Paul turned with her, said: "I don't think it's Hawat, either. Is it possible it's Yueh?"
    "He's not a lieutenant or companion," she said. "And I can assure you he hates the Harkonnens as bitterly as we do." 
    Paul directed his attention to the cliffs, thinking: And it couldn't be Gurney . . . or Duncan. Could it be one of the sub-lieutenants? Impossible. They're all from families that've been loyal to us for generations--for good reason.
    Jessica rubbed her forehead, sensing her own fatigue. So much peril here! She looked out at the filter-yellowed landscape, studying it. Beyond the ducal grounds stretched a high-fenced storage yard--lines of spice silos in it with stilt-legged watchtowers standing around it like so many startled spiders. She could see at least twenty storage yards of silos reaching out to the cliffs of the Shield Wall--silos repeated, stuttering across the basin.
    Slowly, the filtered sun buried itself beneath the horizon. Stars leaped out. She saw one bright star so low on the horizon that it twinkled with a clear, precise rhythm--a trembling of light: blink-blink-blink-blink-blink . . . 
    Paul stirred beside her in the dusky room.
    But Jessica concentrated on that single bright star, realizing that it was too low, that it must come from the Shield Wall cliffs. 
    Someone signaling!
    She tried to read the message, but it was in no code she had ever learned.
    Other lights had come on down on the plain beneath the cliffs: little yellows spaced out against blue darkness. And one light off to their left grew brighter, began to wink back at the cliff--very fast: blinksquirt, glimmer, blink!
    And it was gone.
    The false star in the cliff winked out immediately. 
    Signals . . . and they filled her with premonition.
    Why were lights used to signal across the basin? she asked herself. Why couldn't they use the communications network?
    The answer was obvious: the communinet was certain to be tapped now by agents of the Duke Leto. Light signals could only mean that messages were being sent between his enemies--between Harkonnen agents.
    There came a tapping at the door behind them and the voice of Hawat's man; "All clear, sir . . . m'Lady. Time to be getting the young master to his father."

= = = = = =

It is said that the Duke Leto blinded himself to the perils of Arrakis, that he walked heedlessly into the pit. Would it not be more likely to suggest he had lived so long in the presence of extreme danger he misjudged a change in its intensity? Or is it possible he deliberately sacrificed himself that his son might find a better life? All evidence indicates the Duke was a man not easily hoodwinked.
-from "Muad'Dib: Family Commentaries" by the Princess Irulan

    The Duke Leto Atreides leaned against a parapet of the landing control tower outside Arrakeen. The night's first moon, an oblate silver coin, hung well above the southern horizon. Beneath it, the jagged cliffs of the Shield Wall shone like parched icing through a dust haze. To his left, the lights of Arrakeen glowed in the haze--yellow . . . white . . . blue.
    He thought of the notices posted now above his signature all through the populous places of the planet: "Our Sublime Padishah Emperor has charged me to take possession of this planet and end all dispute."
    The ritualistic formality of it touched him with a feeling of loneliness. Who was fooled by that fatuous legalism? Not the Fremen, certainly. Nor the Houses Minor who controlled the interior trade of Arrakis . . . and were Harkonnen creatures almost to a man.
    They have tried to take the life of my son!
    The rage was difficult to suppress.
    He saw lights of a moving vehicle coming toward the landing field from Arrakeen. He hoped it was the guard and troop carrier bringing Paul. The delay was galling even though he knew it was prompted by caution on the part of Hawat's lieutenant. 
    They have tried to take the life of my son!
    He shook his head to drive out the angry thoughts, glanced back at the field where five of his own frigates were posted around the rim like monolithic sentries.
    Better a cautious delay than . . . 
    The lieutenant was a good one, he reminded himself. A man marked for advancement, completely loyal.
    "Our Sublime Padishah Emperor . . . "
    If the people of this decadent garrison city could only see the Emperor's private note to his "Noble Duke"--the disdainful allusions to veiled men and women: " . . . but what else is one to expect of barbarians whose dearest dream is to live outside the ordered security of the faufreluches?"
    The Duke felt in this moment that his own dearest dream was to end all class distinctions and never again think of deadly order. He looked up and out of the dust at the unwinking stars, thought: Around one of those little lights circles Caladan . . . but I'll never again see my home. The longing for Caladan was a sudden pain in his breast. He felt that it did not come from within himself, but that it reached out to him from Caladan. He could not bring himself to call this dry wasteland of Arrakis his home, and he doubted he ever would.
    I must mask my feelings, he thought. For the boy's sake. If ever he's to have a home, this must be it. I may think of Arrakis as a hell I've reached before death, but he must find here that which will inspire him. There must be something.
    A wave of self-pity, immediately despised and rejected, swept through him, and for some reason he found himself recalling two lines from a poem Gurney Halleck often repeated--

"My lungs taste the air of Time 
Blown past falling sands . . . "

    Well, Gurney would find plenty of falling sands here, the Duke thought. The central wastelands beyond those moon-frosted cliffs were desert--barren rock, dunes, and blowing dust, an uncharted dry wilderness with here and there along its rim and perhaps scattered through it, knots of Fremen. If anything could buy a future for the Atreides line, the Fremen just might do it.
    Provided the Harkonnens hadn't managed to infect even the Fremen with their poisonous schemes. 
    They have tried to take the life of my son!
    A scraping metal racket vibrated through the tower, shook the parapet beneath his arms. Blast shutters dropped in front of him, blocking the view.
    Shuttle's coming in, he thought. Time to go down and get to work. He turned to the stairs behind him, headed down to the big assembly room, trying to remain calm as he descended, to prepare his face for the coming encounter. 
    They have tried to take the life of my son!
    The men were already boiling in from the field when he reached the yellow-domed room. They carried their spacebags over their shoulders, shouting and roistering like students returning from vacation.
    "Hey! Feel that under your dogs? That's gravity, man!" "How many G's does this place pull? Feels heavy." "Nine-tenths of a G by the book." 
    The crossfire of thrown words filled the big room.
    "Did you get a good look at this hole on the way down? Where's all the loot this place's supposed to have?" "The Harkonnens took it with 'em!" "Me for a hot shower and a soft bed!" "Haven't you heard, stupid? No showers down here. You scrub your ass with sand!" "Hey! Can it! The Duke!"
    The Duke stepped out of the stair entry into a suddenly silent room.
    Gurney Halleck strode along at the point of the crowd, bag over one shoulder, the neck of his nine-string baliset clutched in the other hand. They were long-fingered hands with big thumbs, full of tiny movements that drew such delicate music from the baliset.
    The Duke watched Halleck, admiring the ugly lump of a man, noting the glass-splinter eyes with their gleam of savage understanding. Here was a man who lived outside the faufreluches while obeying their every precept. What was it Paul had called him? 
    "Gurney, the valorous."
    Halleck's wispy blond hair trailed across barren spots on his head. His wide mouth was twisted into a pleasant sneer, and the scar of the inkvine whip slashed across his jawline seemed to move with a life of its own. His whole air was of casual, shoulder-set capability. He came up to the Duke, bowed. 
    "Gurney," Leto said.
    "My Lord." He gestured with the baliset toward the men in the room. "This is the last of them. I'd have preferred coming in with the first wave, but . . . "
    "There are still some Harkonnens for you," the Duke said. "Step aside with me, Gurney, where we may talk." 
    "Yours to command, my Lord."
    They moved into an alcove beside a coil-slot water machine while the men stirred restlessly in the big room. Halleck dropped his bag into a corner, kept his grip on the baliset.
    "How many men can you let Hawat have?" the Duke asked. 
    "Is Thufir in trouble. Sire?"
    "He's lost only two agents, but his advance men gave us an excellent line on the entire Harkonnen setup here. If we move fast we may gain a measure of security, the breathing space we require. He wants as many men as you can spare--men who won't balk at a little knife work."
    "I can let him have three hundred of my best," Halleck said. "Where shall I send them?"
    "To the main gate. Hawat has an agent there waiting to take them." 
    "Shall I get about it at once, Sire?"
    "In a moment. We have another problem. The field commandant will hold the shuttle here until dawn on a pretext. The Guild Heighliner that brought us is going on about its business, and the shuttle's supposed to make contact with a cargo ship taking up a load of spice." 
    "Our spice, m'Lord?"
    "Our spice. But the shuttle also will carry some of the spice hunters from the old regime. They've opted to leave with the change of fief and the Judge of the Change is allowing it. These are valuable workers, Gurney, about eight hundred of them. Before the shuttle leaves, you must persuade some of those men to enlist with us." 
    "How strong a persuasion, Sire?"
    "I want their willing cooperation, Gurney. Those men have experience and skills we need. The fact that they're leaving suggests they're not part of the Harkonnen machine. Hawat believes there could be some bad ones planted in the group, but he sees assassins in every shadow."
    "Thufir has found some very productive shadows in his time, m'Lord."
    "And there are some he hasn't found. But I think planting sleepers in this outgoing crowd would show too much imagination for the Harkonnens."
    "Possibly, Sire. Where are these men?"
    "Down on the lower level, in a waiting room. I suggest you go down and play a tune or two to soften their minds, then turn on the pressure. You may offer positions of authority to those who qualify. Offer twenty per cent higher wages than they received under the Harkonnens."
    "No more than that, Sire? I know the Harkonnen pay scales. And to men with their termination pay in their pockets and the wanderlust on them . . . well. Sire, twenty per cent would hardly seem proper inducement to stay."
    Leto spoke impatiently: "Then use your own discretion in particular cases. Just remember that the treasury isn't bottomless. Hold it to twenty per cent whenever you can. We particularly need spice drivers, weather scanners, dune men--any with open sand experience."
    "I understand, Sire. 'They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity of the sand.' "
    "A very moving quotation," the Duke said. "Turn your crew over to a lieutenant. Have him give a short drill on water discipline, then bed the men down for the night in the barracks adjoining the field. Field personnel will direct them. And don't forget the men for Hawat."
    "Three hundred of the best, Sire." He took up his spacebag. "Where shall I report to you when I've completed my chores?" 
    "I've taken over a council room topside here. We'll hold staff there. I want to arrange a new planetary dispersal order with armored squads going out first."
    Halleck stopped in the act of turning away, caught Leto's eye. "Are you anticipating that kind of trouble, Sire? I thought there was a Judge of the Change here."
    "Both open battle and secret," the Duke said. "There'll be blood aplenty spilled here before we're through." 
    " 'And the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land,' " Halleck quoted. 
    The Duke sighed. "Hurry back, Gurney."
    "Very good, m'Lord." The whipscar rippled to his grin. " 'Behold, as a wild ass in the desert, go I forth to my work.' " He turned, strode to the center of the room, paused to relay his orders, hurried on through the men.
    Leto shook his head at the retreating back. Halleck was a continual amazement--a head full of songs, quotations, and flowery phrases . . . and the heart of an assassin when it came to dealing with the Harkonnens.
    Presently, Leto took a leisurely diagonal course across to the lift, acknowledging salutes with a casual hand wave. He recognized a propaganda corpsman, stopped to give him a message that could be relayed to the men through channels: those who had brought their women would want to know the women were safe and where they could be found. The others would wish to know that the population here appeared to boast more women than men.
    The Duke slapped the propaganda man on the arm, a signal that the message had top priority to be put out immediately, then continued across the room. He nodded to the men, smiled, traded pleasantries with a subaltern.
    Command must always look confident, he thought. All that faith riding on your shoulders while you sit in the critical seat and never show it.
    He breathed a sigh of relief when the lift swallowed him and he could turn and face the impersonal doors.
    They have tried to take the life of my son!

= = = = = =

Over the exit of the Arrakeen landing field, crudely carved as though with a poor instrument, there was an inscription that Muad'Dib was to repeat many times. He saw it that first night on Arrakis, having been brought to the ducal command post to participate in his father's first full staff conference. The words of the inscription were a plea to those leaving Arrakis, but they fell with dark import on the eyes of a boy who had just escaped a close brush with death. They said: "O you who know what we suffer here, do not forget us in your prayers. "
-from "Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    "The whole theory of warfare is calculated risk," the Duke said, "but when it comes to risking your own family, the element of calculation gets submerged in . . . other things." 
    He knew he wasn't holding in his anger as well as he should, and he turned, strode down the length of the long table and back.
    The Duke and Paul were alone in the conference room at the landing field. It was an empty-sounding room, furnished only with the long table, old-fashioned three-legged chairs around it, and a map board and projector at one end. Paul sat at the table near the map board. He had told his father the experience with the hunter-seeker and given the reports that a traitor threatened him.
    The Duke stopped across from Paul, pounded the table: "Hawat told me that house was secure!"
    Paul spoke hesitantly: "I was angry, too--at first. And I blamed Hawat. But the threat came from outside the house. It was simple, clever, and direct. And it would've succeeded were it not for the training given me by you and many others--including Hawat." 
    "Are you defending him?" the Duke demanded. 
    "Yes." 
    "He's getting old. That's it. He should be--"
    "He's wise with much experience," Paul said. "How many of Hawat's mistakes can you recall?"
    "I should be the one defending him," the Duke said. "Not you." 
    Paul smiled.
    Leto sat down at the head of the table, put a hand over his son's. "You've . . . matured lately, Son." He lifted his hand. "It gladdens me." He matched his son's smile. "Hawat will punish himself. He'll direct more anger against himself over this than both of us together could pour on him."
    Paul glanced toward the darkened windows beyond the map board, looked at the night's blackness. Room lights reflected from a balcony railing out there. He saw movement and recognized the shape of a guard in Atreides uniform. Paul looked back at the white wall behind his father, then down to the shiny surface of the table, seeing his own hands clenched into fists there.
    The door opposite the Duke banged open. Thufir Hawat strode through it looking older and more leathery than ever. He paced down the length of the table, stopped at attention facing Leto.
    "My Lord," he said, speaking to a point over Leto's head, "I have just learned how I failed you. It becomes necessary that I tender my resig--"
    "Oh, sit down and stop acting the fool," the Duke said. He waved to the chair across from Paul. "If you made a mistake, it was in overestimating the Harkonnens. Their simple minds came up with a simple trick. We didn't count on simple tricks. And my son has been at great pains to point out to me that he came through this largely because of your training. You didn't fail there!" He tapped the back of the empty chair. "Sit down, I say!" 
    Hawat sank into the chair. "But--"
    "I'll hear no more of it," the Duke said. "The incident is past. We have more pressing business. Where are the others?" 
    "I asked them to wait outside while I--" 
    "Call them in." 
    Hawat looked into Leto's eyes. "Sire, I--"
    "I know who my true friends are, Thufir," the Duke said. "Call in the men."
    Hawat swallowed. "At once, my Lord." He swiveled in the chair, called to the open door: "Gurney, bring them in." 
    Halleck led the file of men into the room, the staff officers looking grimly serious followed by the younger aides and specialists, an air of eagerness among them. Brief scuffing sounds echoed around the room as the men took seats. A faint smell of rachag stimulant wafted down the table.
    "There's coffee for those who want it," the Duke said.
    He looked over his men, thinking: They're a good crew. A man could do far worse for this kind of war. He waited while coffee was brought in from the adjoining room and served, noting the tiredness in some of the faces.
    Presently, he put on his mask of quiet efficiency, stood up and commanded their attention with a knuckle rap against the table.
    "Well, gentlemen," he said, "our civilization appears to've fallen so deeply into the habit of invasion that we cannot even obey a simple order of the Imperium without the old ways cropping up." 
    Dry chuckles sounded around the table, and Paul realized that his father had said the precisely correct thing in precisely the correct tone to lift the mood here. Even the hint of fatigue in his voice was right.
    "I think first we'd better learn if Thufir has anything to add to his report on the Fremen," the Duke said. "Thufir?" 
    Hawat glanced up. "I've some economic matters to go into after my general report, Sire, but I can say now that the Fremen appear more and more to be the allies we need. They're waiting now to see if they can trust us, but they appear to be dealing openly. They've sent us a gift--stillsuits of their own manufacture . . . maps of certain desert areas surrounding strongpoints the Harkonnens left behind, . . ." He glanced down at the table. "Their intelligence reports have proved completely reliable and have helped us considerably in our dealings with the Judge of the Change. They've also sent some incidental things--jewelry for the Lady Jessica, spice liquor, candy, medicinals. My men are processing the lot right now. There appears to be no trickery." 
    "You like these people, Thufir?" asked a man down the table.
    Hawat turned to face his questioner. "Duncan Idaho says they're to be admired."
    Paul glanced at his father, back to Hawat, ventured a question: "Have you any new information on how many Fremen there are?" 
    Hawat looked at Paul. "From food processing and other evidence, Idaho estimates the cave complex he visited consisted of some ten thousand people, all told. Their leader said he ruled a sietch of two thousand hearths. We've reason to believe there are a great many such sietch communities. All seem to give their allegiance to someone called Liet." 
    "That's something new," Leto said.
    "It could be an error on my part, Sire. There are things to suggest this Liet may be a local deity."
    Another man down the table cleared his throat, asked: "Is it certain they deal with the smugglers?"
    "A smuggler caravan left this sietch while Idaho was there, carrying a heavy load of spice. They used pack beasts and indicated they faced an eighteen-day journey."
    "It appears," the Duke said, "that the smugglers have redoubled their operations during this period of unrest. This deserves some careful thought. We shouldn't worry too much about unlicensed frigates working off our planet--it's always done. But to have them completely outside our observation--that's not good." 
    "You have a plan. Sire," Hawat asked.
    The Duke looked at Halleck. "Gurney, I want you to head a delegation, an embassy if you will, to contact these romantic businessmen. Tell them I'll ignore their operations as long as they give me a ducal tithe. Hawat here estimates that graft and extra fighting men heretofore required in their operations have been costing them four times that amount."
    "What if the Emperor gets wind of this?" Halleck asked. "He's very jealous of his CHOAM profits, m'Lord."
    Leto smiled. "We'll bank the entire tithe openly in the name of Shaddam IV and deduct it legally from our levy support costs. Let the Harkonnens fight that! And we'll be ruining a few more of the locals who grew fat under the Harkonnen system. No more graft!" 
    A grin twisted Halleck's face. "Ahh, m'Lord, a beautiful low blow. Would that I could see the Baron's face when he learns of this."
    The Duke turned to Hawat. "Thufir, did you get those account books you said you could buy?"
    "Yes, my Lord. They're being examined in detail even now. I've skimmed them, though, and can give a first approximation." 
    "Give it, then."
    "The Harkonnens took ten billion Solaris out of here every three hundred and thirty Standard days."
    A muted gasp ran around the table. Even the younger aides, who had been betraying some boredom, sat up straighter and exchanged wide-eyed looks.
    Halleck murmured: " 'For they shall suck of the abundance of the seas and of the treasure hid in the sand.' "
    "You see, gentlemen," Leto said. "Is there anyone here so naive he believes the Harkonnens have quietly packed up and walked away from all this merely because the Emperor ordered it?" 
    There was a general shaking of heads, murmurous agreement.
    "We will have to take it at the point of the sword," Leto said. He turned to Hawat. "This'd be a good point to report on equipment. How many sandcrawlers, harvesters, spice factories, and supporting equipment have they left us?"
    "A full complement, as it says in the Imperial inventory audited by the Judge of the Change, my Lord," Hawat said. He gestured for an aide to pass him a folder, opened the folder on the table in front of him. "They neglect to mention that less than half the crawlers are operable, that only about a third have carryalls to fly them to spice sands--that everything the Harkonnens left us is ready to break down and fall apart. We'll be lucky to get half the equipment into operation and luckier yet if a fourth of it's still working six months from now."
    "Pretty much as we expected," Leto said. "What's the firm estimate on basic equipment?"
    Hawat glanced at his folder. "About nine hundred and thirty harvester-factories that can be sent out in a few days. About sixty-two hundred and fifty ornithopters for survey, scouting, and weather observation . . . carryalls, a little under a thousand." 
    Halleck said: "Wouldn't it be cheaper to reopen negotiations with the Guild for permission to orbit a frigate as a weather satellite?" 
    The Duke looked at Hawat. "Nothing new there, eh, Thufir?" 
    "We must pursue other avenues for now," Hawat said. "The Guild agent wasn't really negotiating with us. He was merely making it plain--one Mentat to another--that the price was out of our reach and would remain so no matter how long a reach we develop. Our task is to find out why before we approach him again."
    One of Halleck's aides down the table swiveled in his chair, snapped: "There's no justice in this!"
    "Justice?" The Duke looked at the man. "Who asks for justice? We make our own justice. We make it here on Arrakis--win or die, Do you regret casting your lot with us, sir?"
    The man stared at the Duke, then: "No, Sire. You couldn't turn and I could do nought but follow you. Forgive the outburst, but . . ." He shrugged. " . . . we must all feel bitter at times." 
    "Bitterness I understand," the Duke said. "But let us not rail about justice as long as we have arms and the freedom to use them. Do any of the rest of you harbor bitterness? If so, let it out. This is friendly council where any man may speak his mind." 
    Halleck stirred, said: "I think what rankles, Sire, is that we've had no volunteers from the other Great Houses. They address you as 'Leto the Just' and promise eternal friendship, but only as long as it doesn't cost them anything."
    "They don't know yet who's going to win this exchange," the Duke said. "Most of the Houses have grown fat by taking few risks. One cannot truly blame them for this; one can only despise them." He looked at Hawat. "We were discussing equipment. Would you care to project a few examples to familiarize the men with this machinery?" 
    Hawat nodded, gestured to an aide at the projector.
    A solido tri-D projection appeared on the table surface about a third of the way down from the Duke. Some of the men farther along the table stood up to get a better look at it. 
    Paul leaned forward, staring at the machine.
    Scaled against the tiny projected human figures around it, the thing was about one hundred and twenty meters long and about forty meters wide. It was basically a long, bug-like body moving on independent sets of wide tracks.
    "This is a harvester factory," Hawat said. "We chose one in good repair for this projection. There's one dragline outfit that came in with the first team of Imperial ecologists, though, and it's still running . . . although I don't know how . . . or why." 
    "If that's the one they call 'Old Maria,' it belongs in a museum," an aide said. "I think the Harkonnens kept it as a punishment job, a threat hanging over their workers' heads. Be good or you'll be assigned to 'Old Maria.' "
    Chuckles sounded around the table.
    Paul held himself apart from the humor, his attention focused on the projection and the question that filled his mind. He pointed to the image on the table, said: "Thufir, are there sandworms big enough to swallow that whole?"
    Quick silence settled on the table. The Duke cursed under his breath, then thought: No--they have to face the realities here.
    "There're worms in the deep desert could take this entire factory in one gulp," Hawat said. "Up here closer to the Shield Wall where most of the spicing's done there are plenty of worms that could cripple this factory and devour it at their leisure." 
    "Why don't we shield them?" Paul asked.
    "According to Idaho's report," Hawat said, "shields are dangerous in the desert. A body-size shield will call every worm for hundreds of meters around. It appears to drive them into a killing frenzy. We've the Fremen word on this and no reason to doubt it. Idaho saw no evidence of shield equipment at the sietch." 
    "None at all?" Paul asked.
    "It'd be pretty hard to conceal that kind of thing among several thousand people," Hawat said. "Idaho had free access to every part of the sietch. He saw no shields or any indication of their use." 
    "It's a puzzle," the Duke said.
    "The Harkonnens certainly used plenty of shields here," Hawat said. "They had repair depots in every garrison village, and their accounts show a heavy expenditure for shield replacements and parts."
    "Could the Fremen have a way of nullifying shields?" Paul asked.
    "It doesn't seem likely," Hawat said. "It's theoretically possible, of course--a shire-sized static counter charge is supposed to do the trick, but no one's ever been able to put it to the test." 
    "We'd have heard about it before now," Halleck said. "The smugglers have close contact with the Fremen and would've acquired such a device if it were available. And they'd have had no inhibitions against marketing it off planet."
    "I don't like an unanswered question of this importance," Leto said. "Thufir, I want you to give top priority to solution of this problem."
    "We're already working on it, my Lord." He cleared his throat. "Ah-h, Idaho did say one thing: he said you couldn't mistake the Fremen attitude toward shields. He said they were mostly amused by them."
    The Duke frowned, then: "The subject under discussion is spicing equipment."
    Hawat gestured to his aide at the projector.
    The solido-image of the harvester-factory was replaced by a projection of a winged device that dwarfed the images of human figures around it. "This is a carryall," Hawat said. "It's essentially a large 'thopter, whose sole function is to deliver a factory to spice-rich sands, then to rescue the factory when a sandworm appears. They always appear. Harvesting the spice is a process of getting in and getting out with as much as possible." 
    "Admirably suited to Harkonnen morality," the Duke said. 
    Laughter was abrupt and too loud.
    An ornithopter replaced the carryall in the projection focus.
    "These 'thopters are fairly conventional," Hawat said. "Major modifications give them extended range. Extra care has been used in sealing essential areas against sand and dust. Only about one in thirty is shielded--possibly discarding the shield generator's weight for greater range."
    "I don't like this de-emphasis on shields," the Duke muttered. And he thought: Is this the Harkonnen secret? Does it mean we won't even be able to escape on shielded frigates if all goes against us? He shook his head sharply to drive out such thoughts, said: "Let's get to the working estimate. What'll our profit figure be?"
    Hawat turned two pages in his notebook. "After assessing the repairs and operable equipment, we've worked out a first estimate on operating costs. It's based naturally on a depreciated figure for a clear safety margin." He closed his eyes in Mentat semitrance, said: "Under the Harkonnens, maintenance and salaries were held to fourteen per cent. We'll be lucky to make it at thirty per cent at first. With reinvestment and growth factors accounted for, including the CHOAM percentage and military costs, our profit margin will be reduced to a very narrow six or seven per cent until we can replace worn-out equipment. We then should be able to boost it up to twelve or fifteen per cent where it belongs." He opened his eyes. "Unless my Lord wishes to adopt Harkonnen methods." 
    "We're working for a solid and permanent planetary base," the Duke said. "We have to keep a large percentage of the people happy--especially the Fremen." 
    "Most especially the Fremen," Hawat agreed.
    "Our supremacy on Caladan," the Duke said, "depended on sea and air power. Here, we must develop something I choose to call desert power. This may include air power, but it's possible it may not. I call your attention to the lack of 'thopter shields." He shook his head. "The Harkonnens relied on turnover from off planet for some of their key personnel. We don't dare. Each new lot would have its quota of provocateurs."
    "Then we'll have to be content with far less profit and a reduced harvest," Hawat said. "Our output the first two seasons should be down a third from the Harkonnen average."
    "There it is," the Duke said, "exactly as we expected. We'll have to move fast with the Fremen. I'd like five full battalions of Fremen troops before the first CHOAM audit." 
    "That's not much time, Sire," Hawat said.
    "We don't have much time, as you well know. They'll be here with Sardaukar disguised as Harkonnens at the first opportunity. How many do you think they'll ship in, Thufir?" 
    "Four or five battalions all told, Sire. No more. Guild troop-transport costs being what they are."
    "Then five battalions of Fremen plus our own forces ought to do it. Let us have a few captive Sardaukar to parade in front of the Landsraad Council and matters will be much different--profits or no profits." 
    "We'll do our best, Sire."
    Paul looked at his father, back to Hawat, suddenly conscious of the Mentat's great age, aware that the old man had served three generations of Atreides. Aged. It showed in the rheumy shine of the brown eyes, in the cheeks cracked and burned by exotic weathers, in the rounded curve of the shoulders and the thin set of his lips with the cranberry-colored stain of sapho juice.
    So much depends on one aged man, Paul thought.
    "We're presently in a war of assassins," the Duke said, "but it has not achieved full scale. Thufir, what's the condition of the Harkonnen machine here?"
    "We've eliminated two hundred and fifty-nine of their key people, my Lord. No more than three Harkonnen cells remain--perhaps a hundred people in all."
    "These Harkonnen creatures you eliminated," the Duke said, "were they propertied?" 
    "Most were well situated, my Lord--in the entrepreneur class." 
    "I want you to forge certificates of allegiance over the signatures of each of them," the Duke said. "File copies with the Judge of the Change. We'll take the legal position that they stayed under false allegiance. Confiscate their property, take everything, turn out their families, strip them. And make sure the Crown gets its ten per cent. It must be entirely legal."
    Thufir smiled, revealing red-stained teeth beneath the carmine lips. "A move worthy of your grandsire, my Lord. It shames me I didn't think of it first."
    Halleck frowned across the table, surprised a deep scowl on Paul's face. The others were smiling and nodding.
    It's wrong, Paul thought. This'll only make the others fight all the harder. They've nothing to gain by surrendering.
    He knew the actual no-holds-barred convention that ruled in kanly, but this was the sort of move that could destroy them even as it gave them victory.
    " 'I have been a stranger in a strange land,' " Halleck quoted.
    Paul stared at him, recognizing the quotation from the O.C. Bible, wondering: Does Gurney, too, wish an end to devious plots?
    The Duke glanced at the darkness out the windows, looked back at Halleck. "Gurney, how many of those sandworkers did you persuade to stay with us?"
    "Two hundred eighty-six in all, Sire. I think we should take them and consider ourselves lucky. They're all in useful categories." 
    "No more?" The Duke pursed his lips, then: "Well, pass the word along to--"
    A disturbance at the door interrupted him. Duncan Idaho came through the guard there, hurried down the length of the table and bent over the Duke's ear.
    Leto waved him back, said: "Speak out, Duncan. You can see this is strategy staff."
    Paul studied Idaho, marking the feline movements, the swiftness of reflex that made him such a difficult weapons teacher to emulate. Idaho's dark round face turned toward Paul, the cave-sitter eyes giving no hint of recognition, but Paul recognized the mask of serenity over excitement.
    Idaho looked down the length of the table, said: "We've taken a force of Harkonnen mercenaries disguised as Fremen. The Fremen themselves sent us a courier to warn of the false band. In the attack, however, we found the Harkonnens had waylaid the Fremen courier--badly wounded him. We were bringing him here for treatment by our medics when he died. I'd seen how badly off the man was and stopped to do what I could. I surprised him in the attempt to throw something away." Idaho glanced down at Leto. "A knife, m'Lord, a knife the like of which you've never seen." 
    "Crysknife?" someone asked.
    "No doubt of it," Idaho said. "Milky white and glowing with a light of its own like." He reached into his tunic, brought out a sheath with a black-ridged handle protruding from it.
    "Keep that blade in its sheath!"
    The voice came from the open door at the end of the room, a vibrant and penetrating voice that brought them all up, staring.
    A tall, robed figure stood in the door, barred by the crossed swords of the guard. A light tan robe completely enveloped the man except for a gap in the hood and black veil that exposed eyes of total blue--no white in them at all. 
    "Let him enter," Idaho whispered. 
    "Pass that man," the Duke said.
    The guards hesitated, then lowered their swords. 
    The man swept into the room, stood across from the Duke.
    "This is Stilgar, chief of the sietch I visited, leader of those who warned us of the false band," Idaho said.
    "Welcome, sir," Leto said. "And why shouldn't we unsheath this blade?"
    Stilgar glanced at Idaho, said: "You observed the customs of cleanliness and honor among us. I would permit you to see the blade of the man you befriended." His gaze swept the others in the room. "But I do not know these others. Would you have them defile an honorable weapon?"
    "I am the Duke Leto," the Duke said. "Would you permit me to see this blade?"
    "I'll permit you to earn the right to unsheath it," Stilgar said, and, as a mutter of protest sounded around the table, he raised a thin, darkly veined hand. "I remind you this is the blade of one who befriended you."
    In the waiting silence, Paul studied the man, sensing the aura of power that radiated from him. He was a leader--a Fremen leader.
    A man near the center of the table across from Paul muttered: "Who's he to tell us what rights we have on Arrakis?" 
    "It is said that the Duke Leto Atreides rules with the consent of the governed," the Fremen said. "Thus I must tell you the way it is with us: a certain responsibility falls on those who have seen a crysknife." He passed a dark glance across Idaho. "They are ours. They may never leave Arrakis without our consent." 
    Halleck and several of the others started to rise, angry expressions on their faces. Halleck said: "The Duke Leto determines whether--"
    "One moment, please," Leto said, and the very mildness of his voice held them. This must not get out of hand, he thought. He addressed himself to the Fremen: "Sir, I honor and respect the personal dignity of any man who respects my dignity. I am indeed indebted to you. And I always pay my debts. If it is your custom that this knife remain sheathed here, then it is so ordered--by me. And if there is any other way we may honor the man who died in our service, you have but to name it."
    The Fremen stared at the Duke, then slowly pulled aside his veil, revealing a thin nose and full-lipped mouth in a glistening black beard. Deliberately he bent over the end of the table, spat on its polished surface.
    As the men around the table started to surge to their feet, Idaho's voice boomed across the room: "Hold!"
    Into the sudden charged stillness, Idaho said: "We thank you, Stilgar, for the gift of your body's moisture. We accept it in the spirit with which it is given." And Idaho spat on the table in front of the Duke.
    Aside to the Duke, he said; "Remember how precious water is here, Sire. That was a token of respect."
    Leto sank back into his own chair, caught Paul's eye, a rueful grin on his son's face, sensed the slow relaxation of tension around the table as understanding came to his men.
    The Fremen looked at Idaho, said: "You measured well in my sietch, Duncan Idaho. Is there a bond on your allegiance to your Duke?" 
    "He's asking me to enlist with him. Sire," Idaho said. 
    "Would he accept a dual allegiance?" Leto asked. 
    "You wish me to go with him, Sire?"
    "I wish you to make your own decision in the matter," Leto said, and he could not keep the urgency out of his voice.
    Idaho studied the Fremen. "Would you have me under these conditions, Stilgar? There'd be times when I'd have to return to serve my Duke."
    "You fight well and you did your best for our friend," Stilgar said. He looked at Leto. "Let it be thus: the man Idaho keeps the crysknife he holds as a mark of his allegiance to us. He must be cleansed, of course, and the rites observed, but this can be done. He will be Fremen and soldier of the Atreides. There is precedent for this: Liet serves two masters." 
    "Duncan?" Leto asked.
    "I understand, Sire," Idaho said. 
    "It is agreed, then," Leto said.
    "Your water is ours, Duncan Idaho." Stilgar said. "The body of our friend remains with your Duke. His water is Atreides water. It is a bond between us."
    Leto sighed, glanced at Hawat, catching the old Mentat's eye. Hawat nodded, his expression pleased.
    "I will await below," Stilgar said, "while Idaho makes farewell with his friends. Turok was the name of our dead friend. Remember that when it comes time to release his spirit. You are friends of Turok." 
    Stilgar started to turn away.
    "Will you not stay a while?" Leto asked.
    The Fremen turned back, whipping his veil into place with a casual gesture, adjusting something beneath it. Paul glimpsed what looked like a thin tube before the veil settled into place. 
    "Is there reason to stay?" the Fremen asked. 
    "We would honor you," the Duke said.
    "Honor requires that I be elsewhere soon," the Fremen said. He shot another glance at Idaho, whirled, and strode out past the door guards.
    "If the other Fremen match him, we'll serve each other well," Leto said.
    Idaho spoke in a dry voice: "He's a fair sample, Sire." 
    "You understand what you're to do, Duncan?" 
    "I'm your ambassador to the Fremen, Sire."
    "Much depends on you, Duncan. We're going to need at least five battalions of those people before the Sardaukar descend on us."
    "This is going to take some doing, Sire. The Fremen are a pretty independent bunch." Idaho hesitated, then: "And, Sire, there's one other thing. One of the mercenaries we knocked over was trying to get this blade from our dead Fremen friend. The mercenary says there's a Harkonnen reward of a million Solaris for anyone who'll bring in a single crysknife."
    Leto's chin came up in a movement of obvious surprise. "Why do they want one of those blades so badly?"
    "The knife is ground from a sandworm's tooth; it's the mark of the Fremen, Sire. With it, a blue-eyed man could penetrate any sietch in the land. They'd question me unless I were known. I don't look Fremen. But . . . " 
    "Piter de Vries," the Duke said.
    "A man of devilish cunning, my Lord," Hawat said. 
    Idaho slipped the sheathed knife beneath his tunic. 
    "Guard that knife," the Duke said.
    "I understand, m'Lord." He patted the transceiver on his belt kit. "I'll report soon as possible. Thufir has my call code. Use battle language." He saluted, spun about, and hurried after the Fremen.
    They heard his footsteps drumming down the corridor.
    A look of understanding passed between Leto and Hawat. They smiled.
    "We've much to do, Sire," Halleck said. 
    "And I keep you from your work," Leto said.
    "I have the report on the advance bases," Hawat said. "Shall I give it another time, Sire?" 
    "Will it take long?"
    "Not for a briefing. It's said among the Fremen that there were more than two hundred of these advance bases built here on Arrakis during the Desert Botanical Testing Station period. All supposedly have been abandoned, but there are reports they were sealed off before being abandoned." 
    "Equipment in them?" the Duke asked. 
    "According to the reports I have from Duncan." 
    "Where are they located?" Halleck asked.
    "The answer to that question," Hawat said, "is invariably: 'Liet knows.' " 
    "God knows," Leto muttered.
    "Perhaps not. Sire," Hawat said. "You heard this Stilgar use the name. Could he have been referring to a real person?" 
    "Serving two masters," Halleck said. "It sounds like a religious quotation." 
    "And you should know," the Duke said. 
    Halleck smiled.
    "This Judge of the Change," Leto said, "the Imperial ecologist--Kynes . . . Wouldn't he know where those bases are?" 
    "Sire," Hawat cautioned, "this Kynes is an Imperial servant." 
    "And he's a long way from the Emperor," Leto said. "I want those bases. They'd be loaded with materials we could salvage and use for repair of our working equipment."
    "Sire!" Hawat said. "Those bases are still legally His Majesty's fief."
    "The weather here's savage enough to destroy anything," the Duke said. "We can always blame the weather. Get this Kynes and at least find out if the bases exist."
    " 'Twere dangerous to commandeer them," Hawat said. "Duncan was clear on one thing: those bases or the idea of them hold some deep significance for the Fremen. We might alienate the Fremen if we took those bases."
    Paul looked at the faces of the men around them, saw the intensity of the way they followed every word. They appeared deeply disturbed by his father's attitude.
    "Listen to him, Father," Paul said in a low voice. "He speaks truth."
    "Sire," Hawat said, "those bases could give us material to repair every piece of equipment left us, yet be beyond reach for strategic reasons. It'd be rash to move without greater knowledge. This Kynes has arbiter authority from the Imperium. We mustn't forget that. And the Fremen defer to him."
    "Do it gently, then," the Duke said. "I wish to know only if those bases exist." 
    "As you will, Sire." Hawat sat back, lowered his eyes.
    "All right, then," the Duke said. "We know what we have ahead of us--work. We've been trained for it. We've some experience in it. We know what the rewards are and the alternatives are clear enough. You all have your assignments." He looked at Halleck. "Gurney, take care of that smuggler situation first." 
    " 'I shall go unto the rebellious that dwell in the dry land,' " Halleck intoned.
    "Someday I'll catch that man without a quotation and he'll look undressed," the Duke said.
    Chuckles echoed around the table, but Paul heard the effort in them.
    The Duke turned to Hawat. "Set up another command post for intelligence and communications on this floor, Thufir. When you have them ready, I'll want to see you."
    Hawat arose, glanced around the room as though seeking support. He turned away, led the procession out of the room. The others moved hurriedly, scraping their chairs on the floor, balling up in little knots of confusion.
    It ended up in confusion, Paul thought, staring at the backs of the last men to leave. Always before, Staff had ended on an incisive air. This meeting had just seemed to trickle out, worn down by its own inadequacies, and with an argument to top it off.
    For the first time, Paul allowed himself to think about the real possibility of defeat--not thinking about it out of fear or because of warnings such as that of the old Reverend Mother, but facing up to it because of his own assessment of the situation.
    My father is desperate, he thought. Things aren't going well for us at all.
    And Hawat--Paul recalled how the old Mentat had acted during the conference--subtle hesitations, signs of unrest. 
    Hawat was deeply troubled by something.
    "Best you remain here the rest of the night, Son," the Duke said. "It'll be dawn soon, anyway. I'll inform your mother." He got to his feet, slowly, stiffly. "Why don't you pull a few of these chairs together and stretch out on them for some rest." 
    "I'm not very tired, sir." 
    "As you will."
    The Duke folded his hands behind him, began pacing up and down the length of the table.
    Like a caged animal, Paul thought.
    "Are you going to discuss the traitor possibility with Hawat?" Paul asked.
    The Duke stopped across from his son, spoke to the dark windows. "We've discussed the possibility many times." 
    "The old woman seemed so sure of herself," Paul said. "And the message Mother--"
    "Precautions have been taken," the Duke said. He looked around the room, and Paul marked the hunted wildness in his father's eyes. "Remain here. There are some things about the command posts I want to discuss with Thufir." He turned, strode out of the room, nodding shortly to the door guards.
    Paul stared at the place where his father had stood. The space had been empty even before the Duke left the room. And he recalled the old woman's warning: " . . . for the father, nothing."

= = = = = =

On that first day when Muad'Dib rode through the streets of Arrakeen with his family, some of the people along the way recalled the legends and the prophecy and they ventured to shout: "Mahdi!" But their shout was more a question than a statement, for as yet they could only hope he was the one foretold as the Lisan al-Gaib, the Voice from the Outer World. Their attention was focused, too, on the mother, because they had heard she was a Bene Gesserit and it was obvious to them that she was like the other Lisan al-Gaib.
-from "Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    The Duke found Thufir Hawat alone in the corner room to which a guard directed him. There was the sound of men setting up communications equipment in an adjoining room, but this place was fairly quiet. The Duke glanced around as Hawat arose from a paper-cluttered table. It was a green-walled enclosure with, in addition to the table, three suspensor chairs from which the Harkonnen "H" had been hastily removed, leaving an imperfect color patch.
    "The chairs are liberated but quite safe," Hawat said. "Where is Paul, Sire?"
    "I left him in the conference room. I'm hoping he'll get some rest without me there to distract him."
    Hawat nodded, crossed to the door to the adjoining room, closed it, shutting off the noise of static and electronic sparking.
    "Thufir," Leto said, "the Imperial and Harkonnen stockpiles of spice attract my attention." 
    "M'Lord?"
    The Duke pursed his lips. "Storehouses are susceptible to destruction." He raised a hand as Hawat started to speak. "Ignore the Emperor's hoard. He'd secretly enjoy it if the Harkonnens were embarrassed. And can the Baron object if something is destroyed which he cannot openly admit that he has?" 
    Hawat shook his head. "We've few men to spare. Sire." 
    "Use some of Idaho's men. And perhaps some of the Fremen would enjoy a trip off planet. A raid on Giedi Prime--there are tactical advantages to such a diversion, Thufir."
    "As you say, my Lord." Hawat turned away, and the Duke saw evidence of nervousness in the old man, thought: Perhaps he suspects I distrust him. He must know I've private reports of traitors. Well--best quiet his fears immediately.
    "Thufir," he said, "since you're one of the few I can trust completely, there's another matter bears discussion. We both know how constant a watch we must keep to prevent traitors from infiltrating our forces . . . but I have two new reports." 
    Hawat turned, stared at him.
    And Leto repeated the stories Paul had brought.
    Instead of bringing on the intense Mentat concentration, the reports only increased Hawat's agitation.
    Leto studied the old man and, presently, said: "You've been holding something back, old friend. I should've suspected when you were so nervous during Staff. What is it that was too hot to dump in front of the full conference?"
    Hawat's sapho-stained lips were pulled into a prim, straight line with tiny wrinkles radiating into them. They maintained their wrinkled stiffness as he said: "My Lord, I don't quite know how to broach this."
    "We've suffered many a scar for each other, Thufir," the Duke said. "You know you can broach any subject with me." 
    Hawat continued to stare at him, thinking: This is how I like him best. This is the man of honor who deserves every bit of my loyalty and service. Why must I hurt him?
    "Well?" Leto demanded.
    Hawat shrugged. "It's a scrap of a note. We took it from a Harkonnen courier. The note was intended for an agent named Pardee. We've good reason to believe Pardee was top man in the Harkonnen underground here. The note--it's a thing that could have great consequence or no consequence. It's susceptible to various interpretations." 
    "What's the delicate content of this note?"
    "Scrap of a note, my Lord. Incomplete. It was on minimic film with the usual destruction capsule attached. We stopped the acid action just short of full erasure, leaving only a fragment. The fragment, however, is extremely suggestive." 
    "Yes?"
    Hawat rubbed at his lips. "It says: ' . . . eto will never suspect, and when the blow falls on him from a beloved hand, its source alone should be enough to destroy him.' The note was under the Baron's own seal and I've authenticated the seal." 
    "Your suspicion is obvious," the Duke said and his voice was suddenly cold.
    "I'd sooner cut off my arms than hurt you," Hawat said. "My Lord, what if . . ."
    "The Lady Jessica," Leto said, and he felt anger consuming him. "Couldn't you wring the facts out of this Pardee?" 
    "Unfortunately, Pardee no longer was among the living when we intercepted the courier. The courier, I'm certain, did not know what he carried." 
    "I see."
    Leto shook his head, thinking: What a slimy piece of business. There can't be anything in it. I know my woman. 
    "My Lord, if--" 
    "No!" the Duke barked. "There's a mistake here that--" 
    "We cannot ignore it, my Lord."
    "She's been with me for sixteen years! There've been countless opportunities for--You yourself investigated the school and the woman!" 
    Hawat spoke bitterly: "Things have been known to escape me." 
    "It's impossible, I tell you! The Harkonnens want to destroy the Atreides line--meaning Paul, too. They've already tried once. Could a woman conspire against her own son?"
    "Perhaps she doesn't conspire against her son. And yesterday's attempt could've been a clever sham." 
    "It couldn't have been a sham."
    "Sire, she isn't supposed to know her parentage, but what if she does know? What if she were an orphan, say, orphaned by an Atreides?"
    "She'd have moved long before now. Poison in my drink . . . a stiletto at night. Who has had better opportunity?" 
    "The Harkonnens mean to destroy you, my Lord. Their intent is not just to kill. There's a range of fine distinctions in kanly. This could be a work of art among vendettas."
    The Duke's shoulders slumped. He closed his eyes, looking old and tired. It cannot be, he thought. The woman has opened her heart to me.
    "What better way to destroy me than to sow suspicion of the woman I love?" he asked.
    "An interpretation I've considered," Hawat said. "Still . . . " 
    The Duke opened his eyes, stared at Hawat, thinking: Let him be suspicious. Suspicion is his trade, not mine. Perhaps if I appear to believe this, that will make another man careless. 
    "What do you suggest?" the Duke whispered.
    "For now, constant surveillance, my Lord. She should be watched at all times. I will see it's done unobtrusively. Idaho would be the ideal choice for the job. Perhaps in a week or so we can bring him back. There's a young man we've been training in Idaho's troop who might be ideal to send to the Fremen as a replacement. He's gifted in diplomacy." 
    "Don't jeopardize our foothold with the Fremen." 
    "Of course not, Sire." 
    "And what about Paul?" 
    "Perhaps we could alert Dr. Yueh." 
    Leto turned his back on Hawat. "I leave it in your hands." 
    "I shall use discretion, my Lord."
    At least I can count on that, Leto thought. And he said: "I will take a walk. If you need me, I'll be within the perimeter. The guard can--"
    "My Lord, before you go, I've a filmclip you should read. It's a first-approximation analysis on the Fremen religion. You'll recall you asked me to report on it." 
    The Duke paused, spoke without turning. "Will it not wait?" 
    "Of course, my Lord. You asked what they were shouting, though. It was 'Mahdi!' They directed the term at the young master. When they--" 
    "At Paul?"
    "Yes, my Lord. They've a legend here, a prophecy, that a leader will come to them, child of a Bene Gesserit, to lead them to true freedom. It follows the familiar messiah pattern." 
    "They think Paul is this . . . this . . . "
    "They only hope, my Lord." Hawat extended a filmclip capsule.
    The Duke accepted it, thrust it into a pocket. "I'll look at it later." 
    "Certainly, my Lord." 
    "Right now, I need time to . . . think." 
    "Yes, my Lord."
    The Duke took a deep sighing breath, strode out the door. He turned to his right down the hall, began walking, hands behind his back, paying little attention to where he was. There were corridors and stairs and balconies and halls . . . people who saluted and stood aside for him.
    In time he came back to the conference room, found it dark and Paul asleep on the table with a guard's robe thrown over him and a ditty pack for a pillow. The Duke walked softly down the length of the room and onto the balcony overlooking the landing field. A guard at the corner of the balcony, recognizing the Duke by the dim reflection of lights from the field, snapped to attention.
    "At ease," the Duke murmured. He leaned against the cold metal of the balcony rail.
    A predawn hush had come over the desert basin. He looked up. Straight overhead, the stars were a sequin shawl flung over blue-black. Low on the southern horizon, the night's second moon peered through a thin dust haze--an unbelieving moon that looked at him with a cynical light.
    As the Duke watched, the moon dipped beneath the Shield Wall cliffs, frosting them, and in the sudden intensity of darkness, he experienced a chill. He shivered. 
    Anger shot through him.
    The Harkonnens have hindered and hounded and hunted me for the last time, he thought. They are dung heaps with village provost minds! Here I make my stand! And he thought with a touch of sadness: I must rule with eye and claw--as the hawk among lesser birds. Unconsciously, his hand brushed the hawk emblem on his tunic.
    To the east, the night grew a faggot of luminous gray, then seashell opalescence that dimmed the stars. There came the long, bell-tolling movement of dawn striking across a broken horizon. 
    It was a scene of such beauty it caught all his attention. 
    Some things beggar likeness, he thought.
    He had never imagined anything here could be as beautiful as that shattered red horizon and the purple and ochre cliffs. Beyond the landing field where the night's faint dew had touched life into the hurried seeds of Arrakis, he saw great puddles of red blooms and, running through them, an articulate tread of violet . . . like giant footsteps.
    "It's a beautiful morning. Sire," the guard said. 
    "Yes, it is."
    The Duke nodded, thinking: Perhaps this planet could grow on one. Perhaps it could become a good home for my son.
    Then he saw the human figures moving into the flower fields, sweeping them with strange scythe-like devices--dew gatherers. Water so precious, here that even the dew must be collected.
    And it could be a hideous place, the Duke thought.

= = = = = =

"There is probably no more terrible instant of enlightenment than the one in which you discover your father is a man--with human flesh."
-from "Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    The Duke said: "Paul, I'm doing a hateful thing, but I must." He stood beside the portable poison snooper that had been brought into the conference room for their breakfast. The thing's sensor arms hung limply over the table, reminding Paul of some weird insect newly dead.
    The Duke's attention was directed out the windows at the landing field and its roiling of dust against the morning sky.
    Paul had a viewer in front of him containing a short filmclip on Fremen religious practices. The clip had been compiled by one of Hawat's experts and Paul found himself disturbed by the references to himself.
    "Mahdi!"
    "Lisan al-Gaib!"
    He could close his eyes and recall the shouts of the crowds. So that is what they hope, he thought. And he remembered what the old Reverend Mother had said: Kwisatz Haderach. The memories touched his feelings of terrible purpose, shading this strange world with sensations of familiarity that he could not understand. 
    "A hateful thing," the Duke said. 
    "What do you mean, sir?"
    Leto turned, looked down at his son. "Because the Harkonnens think to trick me by making me distrust your mother. They don't know that I'd sooner distrust myself." 
    "I don't understand, sir."
    Again, Leto looked out the windows. The white sun was well up into its morning quadrant. Milky light picked out a boiling of dust clouds that spilled over into the blind canyons interfingering the Shield Wall.
    Slowly, speaking in a slow voice to contain his anger, the Duke explained to Paul about the mysterious note. 
    "You might just as well mistrust me," Paul said.
    "They have to think they've succeeded," the Duke said. "They must think me this much of a fool. It must look real. Even your mother may not know the sham." 
    "But, sir! Why?"
    "Your mother's response must not be an act. Oh, she's capable of a supreme act . . . but too much rides on this. I hope to smoke out a traitor. It must seem that I've been completely cozened. She must be hurt this way that she does not suffer greater hurt." 
    "Why do you tell me, Father? Maybe I'll give it away." 
    "They'll not watch you in this thing," the Duke said. "You'll keep the secret. You must." He walked to the windows, spoke without turning. "This way, if anything should happen to me, you can tell her the truth--that I never doubted her, not for the smallest instant. I should want her to know this."
    Paul recognized the death thoughts in his father's words, spoke quickly: "Nothing's going to happen to you, sir. The--" 
    "Be silent, Son."
    Paul stared at his father's back, seeing the fatigue in the angle of the neck, in the line of the shoulders, in the slow movements. 
    "You're just tired, Father."
    "I am tired," the Duke agreed. "I'm morally tired. The melancholy degeneration of the Great Houses has afflicted me at last, perhaps. And we were such strong people once." 
    Paul spoke in quick anger: "Our House hasn't degenerated!"
    "Hasn't it?"
    The Duke turned, faced his son, revealing dark circles beneath hard eyes, a cynical twist of mouth. "I should wed your mother, make her my Duchess. Yet . . . my unwedded state gives some Houses hope they may yet ally with me through their marriageable daughters." He shrugged. "So, I . . . " 
    "Mother has explained this to me."
    "Nothing wins more loyalty for a leader than an air of bravura," the Duke said. "I, therefore, cultivate an air of bravura." 
    "You lead well," Paul protested. "You govern well. Men follow you willingly and love you."
    "My propaganda corps is one of the finest," the Duke said. Again, he turned to stare out at the basin. "There's greater possibility for us here on Arrakis than the Imperium could ever suspect. Yet sometimes I think it'd have been better if we'd run for it, gone renegade. Sometimes I wish we could sink back into anonymity among the people, become less exposed to . . . " 
    "Father!"
    "Yes, I am tired," the Duke said. "Did you know we're using spice residue as raw material and already have our own factory to manufacture filmbase?" 
    "Sir?"
    "We mustn't run short of filmbase," the Duke said. "Else, how could we flood village and city with our information? The people must learn how well I govern them. How would they know if we didn't tell them?" 
    "You should get some rest," Paul said.
    Again, the Duke faced his son. "Arrakis has another advantage I almost forgot to mention. Spice is in everything here. You breathe it and eat it in almost everything. And I find that this imparts a certain natural immunity to some of the most common poisons of the Assassins' Handbook. And the need to watch every drop of water puts all food production--yeast culture, hydroponics, chemavit, everything--under the strictest surveillance. We cannot kill off large segments of our population with poison--and we cannot be attacked this way, either. Arrakis makes us moral and ethical." 
    Paul started to speak, but the Duke cut him off, saying: "I have to have someone I can say these things to, Son." He sighed, glanced back at the dry landscape where even the flowers were gone now--trampled by the dew gatherers, wilted under the early sun.
    "On Caladan, we ruled with sea and air power," the Duke said. "Here, we must scrabble for desert power. This is your inheritance, Paul. What is to become of you if anything happens to me? You'll not be a renegade House, but a guerrilla House--running, hunted." 
    Paul groped for words, could find nothing to say. He had never seen his father this despondent.
    "To hold Arrakis," the Duke said, "one is faced with decisions that may cost one his self-respect." He pointed out the window to the Atreides green and black banner hanging limply from a staff at the edge of the landing field. "That honorable banner could come to mean many evil things."
    Paul swallowed in a dry throat. His father's words carried futility, a sense of fatalism that left the boy with an empty feeling in his chest.
    The Duke took an antifatigue tablet from a pocket, gulped it dry. "Power and fear," he said. "The tools of statecraft. I must order new emphasis on guerrilla training for you. That filmclip there--they call you 'Mahdi'--'Lisan al-Gaib'--as a last resort, you might capitalize on that."
    Paul stared at his father, watching the shoulders straighten as the tablet did its work, but remembering the words of fear and doubt.
    "What's keeping that ecologist?" the Duke muttered. "I told Thufir to have him here early."

= = = = = =

My father, the Padishah Emperor, took me by the hand one day and I sensed in the ways my mother had taught me that he was disturbed. He led me down the Hall of Portraits to the ego-likeness of the Duke Leto Atreides. I marked the strong resemblance between them--my father and this man in the portrait--both with thin, elegant faces and sharp features dominated by cold eyes. "Princess-daughter," my father said, "I would that you'd been older when it came time for this man to choose a woman." My father was 71 at the time and looking no older than the man in the portrait, and I was but 14, yet I remember deducing in that instant that my father secretly wished the Duke had been his son, and disliked the political necessities that made them enemies.
-"In My Father's House" by the Princess Irulan

    His first encounter with the people he had been ordered to betray left Dr. Kynes shaken. He prided himself on being a scientist to whom legends were merely interesting clues, pointing toward cultural roots. Yet the boy fitted the ancient prophecy so precisely. He had "the questing eyes," and the air of "reserved candor." 
    Of course, the prophecy left certain latitude as to whether the Mother Goddess would bring the Messiah with her or produce Him on the scene. Still, there was this odd correspondence between prediction and persons.
    They met in midmorning outside the Arrakeen landing field's administration building. An unmarked ornithopter squatted nearby, humming softly on standby like a somnolent insect. An Atreides guard stood beside it with bared sword and the faint air-distortion of a shield around him.
    Kynes sneered at the shield pattern, thinking: Arrakis has a surprise for them there!
    The planetologist raised a hand, signaled for his Fremen guard to fall back. He strode on ahead toward the building's entrance--the dark hole in plastic-coated rock. So exposed, that monolithic building, he thought. So much less suitable than a cave.
    Movement within the entrance caught his attention. He stopped, taking the moment to adjust his robe and the set of his stillsuit at the left shoulder.
    The entrance doors swung wide. Atreides guards emerged swiftly, all of them heavily armed--slow-pellet stunners, swords and shields. Behind them came a tall man, hawk-faced, dark of skin and hair. He wore a jubba cloak with Atreides crest at the breast, and wore it in a way that betrayed his unfamiliarity with the garment. It clung to the legs of his stillsuit on one side. It lacked a free-swinging, striding rhythm.
    Beside the man walked a youth with the same dark hair, but rounder in the face. The youth seemed small for the fifteen years Kynes knew him to have. But the young body carried a sense of command, a poised assurance, as though he saw and knew things all around him that were not visible to others. And he wore the same style cloak as his father, yet with casual ease that made one think the boy had always worn such clothing.
    "The Mahdi will be aware of things others cannot see," went the prophecy.
    Kynes shook his head, telling himself: They're just people.
    With the two, garbed like them for the desert, came a man Kynes recognized--Gurney Halleck. Kynes took a deep breath to still his resentment against Halleck, who had briefed him on how to behave with the Duke and ducal heir.
    "You may call the Duke 'my Lord ' or 'Sire.' 'Noble Born' also is correct, but usually reserved for more formal occasions. The son may be addressed as 'young Master' or 'my Lord.' The Duke is a man of much leniency, but brooks little familiarity." 
    And Kynes thought as he watched the group approach: They'll learn soon enough who's master on Arrakis. Order me questioned half the night by that Mentat, will they? Expect me to guide them on an inspection of spice mining, do they?
    The import of Hawat's questions had not escaped Kynes. They wanted the Imperial bases. And it was obvious they'd learned of the bases from Idaho.
    I will have Stilgar send Idaho's head to this Duke, Kynes told himself.
    The ducal party was only a few paces away now, their feet in desert boots crunching the sand. 
    Kynes bowed. "My Lord, Duke."
    As he had approached the solitary figure standing near the ornithopter, Leto had studied him: tall, thin, dressed for the desert in loose robe, stillsuit, and low boots. The man's hood was thrown back, its veil hanging to one side, revealing long sandy hair, a sparse beard. The eyes were that fathomless blue-within-blue under thick brows. Remains of dark stains smudged his eye sockets. 
    "You're the ecologist," the Duke said.
    "We prefer the old title here, my Lord," Kynes said. "Planetologist."
    "As you wish," the Duke said. He glanced down at Paul. "Son, this is the Judge of the Change, the arbiter of dispute, the man set here to see that the forms are obeyed in our assumption of power over this fief." He glanced at Kynes. "And this is my son." 
    "My Lord," Kynes said.
    "Are you a Fremen?" Paul asked.
    Kynes smiled. "I am accepted in both sietch and village, young Master. But I am in His Majesty's service, the Imperial Planetologist."
    Paul nodded, impressed by the man's air of strength. Halleck had pointed Kynes out to Paul from an upper window of the administration building: "The man standing there with the Fremen escort--the one moving now toward the ornithopter."
    Paul had inspected Kynes briefly with binoculars, noting the prim, straight mouth, the high forehead. Halleck had spoken in Paul's ear: "Odd sort of fellow. Has a precise way of speaking--clipped off, no fuzzy edges--razor-apt."
    And the Duke, behind them, had said: "Scientist type."
    Now, only a few feet from the man, Paul sensed the power in Kynes, the impact of personality, as though he were blood royal, born to command.
    "I understand we have you to thank for our stillsuits and these cloaks," the Duke said.
    "I hope they fit well, my Lord," Kynes said. "They're of Fremen make and as near as possible the dimensions given me by your man Halleck here."
    "I was concerned that you said you couldn't take us into the desert unless we wore these garments," the Duke said. "We can carry plenty of water. We don't intend to be out long and we'll have air cover--the escort you see overhead right now. It isn't likely we'd be forced down."
    Kynes stared at him, seeing the water-fat flesh. He spoke coldly: "You never talk of likelihoods on Arrakis. You speak only of possibilities."
    Halleck stiffened. "The Duke is to be addressed as my Lord or Sire!"
    Leto gave Halleck their private handsignal to desist, said: "Our ways are new here, Gurney. We must make allowances." 
    "As you wish, Sire."
    "We are indebted to you, Dr. Kynes," Leto said. "These suits and the consideration for our welfare will be remembered." 
    On impulse, Paul called to mind a quotation from the O.C. Bible, said: " 'The gift is the blessing of the river.' "
    The words rang out overloud in the still air. The Fremen escort Kynes had left in the shade of the administration building leaped up from their squatting repose, muttering in open agitation. One cried out: "Lisan al-Gaib!"
    Kynes whirled, gave a curt, chopping signal with a hand, waved the guard away. They fell back, grumbling among themselves, trailed away around the building. 
    "Most interesting," Leto said.
    Kynes passed a hard glare over the Duke and Paul, said: "Most of the desert natives here are a superstitious lot. Pay no attention to them. They mean no harm." But he thought of the words of the legend: "They will greet you with Holy Words and your gifts will be a blessing."
    Leto's assessment of Kynes--based partly on Hawat's brief verbal report (guarded and full of suspicions)--suddenly crystallized: the man was Fremen. Kynes had come with a Fremen escort, which could mean simply that the Fremen were testing their new freedom to enter urban areas--but it had seemed an honor guard. And by his manner, Kynes was a proud man, accustomed to freedom, his tongue and his manner guarded only by his own suspicions. Paul's question had been direct and pertinent. 
    Kynes had gone native.
    "Shouldn't we be going, Sire?" Halleck asked.
    The Duke nodded. "I'll fly my own 'thopter. Kynes can sit up front with me to direct me. You and Paul take the rear seats." 
    "One moment, please," Kynes said. "With your permission, Sire, I must check the security of your suits."
    The Duke started to speak, but Kynes pressed on: "I have concern for my own flesh as well as yours . . . my Lord. I'm well aware of whose throat would be slit should harm befall you two while you're in my care."
    The Duke frowned, thinking: How delicate this moment! If I refuse, it may offend him. And this could be a man whose value to me is beyond measure. Yet . . . to let him inside my shield, touching my person when I know so little about him?
    The thoughts flicked through his mind with decision hard on their heels. "We're in your hands," the Duke said. He stepped forward, opening his robe, saw Halleck come up on the balls of his feet, poised and alert, but remaining where he was. "And, if you'd be so kind," the Duke said, "I'd appreciate an explanation of the suit from one who lives so intimately with it."
    "Certainly," Kynes said. He felt up under the robe for the shoulder seals, speaking as he examined the suit. "It's basically a micro-sandwich--a high-efficiency filter and heat-exchange system." He adjusted the shoulder seals. "The skin-contact layer's porous. Perspiration passes through it, having cooled the body . . . near-normal evaporation process. The next two layers . . . " Kynes tightened the chest fit. ". . . include heat exchange filaments and salt precipitators. Salt's reclaimed." 
    The Duke lifted his arms at a gesture, said: "Most interesting." 
    "Breathe deeply," Kynes said. 
    The Duke obeyed.
    Kynes studied the underarm seals, adjusted one. "Motions of the body, especially breathing," he said, "and some osmotic action provide the pumping force." He loosened the chest fit slightly. "Reclaimed water circulates to catchpockets from which you draw it through this tube in the clip at your neck."
    The Duke twisted his chin in and down to look at the end of the tube. "Efficient and convenient," he said. "Good engineering." 
    Kynes knelt, examined the leg seals. "Urine and feces are processed in the thigh pads," he said, and stood up, felt the neck fitting, lifted a sectioned flap there. "In the open desert, you wear this filter across your face, this tube in the nostrils with these plugs to insure a tight fit. Breathe in through the mouth filter, out through the nose tube. With a Fremen suit in good working order, you won't lose more than a thimbleful of moisture a day--even if you're caught in the Great Erg." 
    "A thimbleful a day," the Duke said.
    Kynes pressed a finger against the suit's forehead pad, said: "This may rub a little. It if irritates you, please tell me. I could slit-patch it a bit tighter."
    "My thanks," the Duke said. He moved his shoulders in the suit as Kynes stepped back, realizing that it did feel better now--tighter and less irritating.
    Kynes turned to Paul. "Now, let's have a look at you, lad." 
    A good man but he'll have to learn to address us properly, the Duke thought.
    Paul stood passively as Kynes inspected the suit. It had been an odd sensation putting on the crinkling, slick-surfaced garment. In his foreconsciousness had been the absolute knowledge that he had never before worn a stillsuit. Yet, each motion of adjusting the adhesion tabs under Gurney's inexpert guidance had seemed natural, instinctive. When he had tightened the chest to gain maximum pumping action from the motion of breathing, he had known what he did and why. When he had fitted the neck and forehead tabs tightly, he had known it was to prevent friction blisters.
    Kynes straightened, stepped back with a puzzled expression. "You've worn a stillsuit before?" he asked. 
    "This is the first time." 
    "Then someone adjusted it for you?" 
    "No."
    "Your desert boots are fitted slip-fashion at the ankles. Who told you to do that?" 
    "It . . . seemed the right way." 
    "That it most certainly is."
    And Kynes rubbed his cheek, thinking of the legend: "He shall know your ways as though born to them."
    "We waste time," the Duke said. He gestured to the waiting 'thopter, led the way, accepting the guard's salute with a nod. He climbed in, fastened his safety harness, checked controls and instruments. The craft creaked as the others clambered aboard.
    Kynes fastened his harness, focused on the padded comfort of the aircraft--soft luxury of gray-green upholstery, gleaming instruments, the sensation of filtered and washed air in his lungs as doors slammed and vent fans whirred alive. 
    So soft! he thought.
    "All secure, Sire," Halleck said.
    Leto fed power to the wings, felt them cup and dip--once, twice. They were airborne in ten meters, wings feathered tightly and afterjets thrusting them upward in a steep, hissing climb.
    "Southeast over the Shield Wall," Kynes said. "That's where I told your sandmaster to concentrate his equipment." 
    "Right."
    The Duke banked into his air cover, the other craft taking up their guard positions as they headed southeast.
    "The design and manufacture of these stillsuits bespeaks a high degree of sophistication," the Duke said.
    "Someday I may show you a sietch factory," Kynes said.
    "I would find that interesting," the Duke said. "I note that suits are manufactured also in some of the garrison cities." 
    "Inferior copies," Kynes said. "Any Dune man who values his skin wears a Fremen suit." 
    "And it'll hold your water loss to a thimbleful a day?" 
    "Properly suited, your forehead cap tight, all seals in order, your major water loss is through the palms of your hands," Kynes said. "You can wear suit gloves if you're not using your hands for critical work, but most Fremen in the open desert rub their hands with juice from the leaves of the creosote bush. It inhibits perspiration." 
    The Duke glanced down to the left at the broken landscape of the Shield Wall--chasms of tortured rock, patches of yellow-brown crossed by black lines of fault shattering. It was as though someone had dropped this ground from space and left it where it smashed.
    They crossed a shallow basin with the clear outline of gray sand spreading across it from a canyon opening to the south. The sand fingers ran out into the basin--a dry delta outlined against darker rock.
    Kynes sat back, thinking about the water-fat flesh he had felt beneath the stillsuits. They wore shield belts over their robes, slow pellet stunners at the waist, coin-sized emergency transmitters on cords around their necks. Both the Duke and his son carried knives in wrist sheathes and the sheathes appeared well worn. The people struck Kynes as a strange combination of softness and armed strength. There was a poise to them totally unlike the Harkonnens.
    "When you report to the Emperor on the change of government here, will you say we observed the rules?" Leto asked. He glanced at Kynes, back to their course.
    "The Harkonnens left; you came," Kynes said.
    "And is everything as it should be?" Leto asked.
    Momentary tension showed in the tightening of a muscle along Kynes' jaw. "As Planetologist and Judge of the Change, I am a direct subject of the Imperium . . . my Lord." 
    The Duke smiled grimly. "But we both know the realities." 
    "I remind you that His Majesty supports my work." 
    "Indeed? And what is your work?"
    In the brief silence, Paul thought: He's pushing this Kynes too hard. Paul glanced at Halleck, but the minstrel-warrior was staring out at the barren landscape.
    Kynes spoke stiffly: "You, of course, refer to my duties as planetologist." 
    "Of course."
    "It is mostly dry land biology and botany . . . some geological work--core drilling and testing. You never really exhaust the possibilities of an entire planet." 
    "Do you also investigate the spice?"
    Kynes turned, and Paul noted the hard line of the man's cheek. "A curious question, my Lord."
    "Bear in mind, Kynes, that this is now my fief. My methods differ from those of the Harkonnens. I don't care if you study the spice as long as I share what you discover." He glanced at the planetologist. "The Harkonnens discouraged investigation of the spice, didn't they?" 
    Kynes stared back without answering.
    "You may speak plainly," the Duke said, "without fear for your skin."
    "The Imperial Court is, indeed, a long way off," Kynes muttered. And he thought: What does this water-soft invader expect? Does he think me fool enough to enlist with him?
    The Duke chuckled, keeping his attention on their course. "I detect a sour note in your voice, sir. We've waded in here with our mob of tame killers, eh? And we expect you to realize immediately that we're different from the Harkonnens?"
    "I've seen the propaganda you've flooded into sietch and village," Kynes said. " 'Love the good Duke!' Your corps of--" 
    "Here now!" Halleck barked. He snapped his attention away from the window, leaned forward. 
    Paul put a hand on Halleck's arm.
    "Gurney!" the Duke said. He glanced back. "This man's been long under the Harkonnens." 
    Halleck sat back. "Ayah."
    "Your man Hawat's subtle," Kynes said, "but his object's plain enough." 
    "Will you open those bases to us, then?" the Duke asked. 
    Kynes spoke curtly: "They're His Majesty's property." 
    "They're not being used." 
    "They could be used." 
    "Does His Majesty concur?"
    Kynes darted a hard stare at the Duke. "Arrakis could be an Eden if its rulers would look up from grubbing for spice!" 
    He didn't answer my question, the Duke thought. And he said: "How is a planet to become an Eden without money?" 
    "What is money," Kynes asked, "if it won't buy the services you need?"
    Ah, now! the Duke thought. And he said: "We'll discuss this another time. Right now, I believe we're coming to the edge of the Shield Wall. Do I hold the same course?" 
    "The same course," Kynes muttered.
    Paul looked out his window. Beneath them, the broken ground began to drop away in tumbled creases toward a barren rock plain and a knife-edged shelf. Beyond the shelf, fingernail crescents of dunes marched toward the horizon with here and there in the distance a dull smudge, a darker blotch to tell of something not sand. Rock outcroppings, perhaps. In the heat-addled air, Paul couldn't be sure.
    "Are there any plants down there?" Paul asked.
    "Some," Kynes said. "This latitude's life-zone has mostly what we call minor water stealers--adapted to raiding each other for moisture, gobbling up the trace-dew. Some parts of the desert teem with life. But all of it has learned how to survive under these rigors. If you get caught down there, you imitate that life or you die."
    "You mean steal water from each other?" Paul asked. The idea outraged him, and his voice betrayed his emotion.
    "It's done," Kynes said, "but that wasn't precisely my meaning. You see, my climate demands a special attitude toward water. You are aware of water at all times. You waste nothing that contains moisture." 
    And the Duke thought: " . . . my climate!"
    "Come around two degrees more southerly, my Lord," Kynes said. "There's a blow coming up from the west." 
    The Duke nodded. He had seen the billowing of tan dust there. He banked the 'thopter around, noting the way the escort's wings reflected milky orange from the dust-refracted light as they turned to keep pace with him.
    "This should clear the storm's edge," Kynes said.
    "That sand must be dangerous if you fly into it," Paul said. "Will it really cut the strongest metals?"
    "At this altitude, it's not sand but dust," Kynes said. "The danger is lack of visibility, turbulence, clogged intakes." 
    "We'll see actual spice mining today?" Paul asked. 
    "Very likely," Kynes said.
    Paul sat back. He had used the questions and hyperawareness to do what his mother called "registering" the person. He had Kynes now--tune of voice, each detail of face and gesture. An unnatural folding of the left sleeve on the man's robe told of a knife in an arm sheath. The waist bulged strangely. It was said that desert men wore a belted sash into which they tucked small necessities. Perhaps the bulges came from such a sash--certainly not from a concealed shield belt. A copper pin engraved with the likeness of a hare clasped the neck of Kynes' robe. Another smaller pin with similar likeness hung at the corner of the hood which was thrown back over his shoulders.
    Halleck twisted in the seat beside Paul, reached back into the rear compartment and brought out his baliset. Kynes looked around as Halleck tuned the instrument, then returned his attention to their course.
    "What would you like to hear, young Master?" Halleck asked. 
    "You choose, Gurney," Paul said.
    Halleck bent his ear close to the sounding board, strummed a chord and sang softly:

"Our fathers ate manna in the desert, 
In the burning places where whirlwinds came. 
Lord, save us from that horrible land! 
Save us . . . oh-h-h-h, save us 
From the dry and thirsty land."

    Kynes glanced at the Duke, said: "You do travel with a light complement of guards, my Lord. Are all of them such men of many talents?"
    "Gurney?" The Duke chuckled. "Gurney's one of a kind. I like him with me for his eyes. His eyes miss very little." 
    The planetologist frowned.
    Without missing a beat in his tune, Halleck interposed:

"For I am like an owl of the desert, o!
 Aiyah! am like an owl of the des-ert!"

    The Duke reached down, brought up a microphone from the instrument panel, thumbed it to life, said: "Leader to Escort Gemma. Flying object at nine o'clock, Sector B. Do you identify it?"
    "It's merely a bird," Kynes said, and added: "You have sharp eyes."
    The panel speaker crackled, then: "Escort Gemma. Object examined under full amplification. It's a large bird." 
    Paul looked in the indicated direction, saw the distant speck: a dot of intermittent motion, and realized how keyed up his father must be. Every sense was at full alert.
    "I'd not realized there were birds that large this far into the desert," the Duke said.
    "That's likely an eagle," Kynes said. "Many creatures have adapted to this place."
    The ornithopter swept over a bare rock plain. Paul looked down from their two thousand meters' altitude, saw the wrinkled shadow of their craft and escort. The land beneath seemed flat, but shadow wrinkles said otherwise.
    "Has anyone ever walked out of the desert?" the Duke asked. 
    Halleck's music stopped. He leaned forward to catch the answer.
    "Not from the deep desert," Kynes said. "Men have walked out of the second zone several times. They've survived by crossing the rock areas where worms seldom go."
    The timbre of Kynes' voice held Paul's attention. He felt his sense come alert the way they were trained to do.
    "Ah-h, the worms," the Duke said. "I must see one sometime." 
    "You may see one today," Kynes said. "Wherever there is spice, there are worms." 
    "Always?" Halleck asked. 
    "Always."
    "Is there relationship between worm and spice?" the Duke asked.
    Kynes turned and Paul saw the pursed lips as the man spoke. "They defend spice sands. Each worm has a--territory. As to the spice . . . who knows? Worm specimens we've examined lead us to suspect complicated chemical interchanges within them. We find traces of hydrochloric acid in the ducts, more complicated acid forms elsewhere. I'll give you my monograph on the subject."
    "And a shield's no defense?" the Duke asked.
    "Shields!" Kynes sneered. "Activate a shield within the worm zone and you seal your fate. Worms ignore territory lines, come from far around to attack a shield. No man wearing a shield has ever survived such attack." 
    "How are worms taken, then?"
    "High voltage electrical shock applied separately to each ring segment is the only known way of killing and preserving an entire worm," Kynes said. "They can be stunned and shattered by explosives, but each ring segment has a life of its own. Barring atomics, I know of no explosive powerful enough to destroy a large worm entirely. They're incredibly tough."
    "Why hasn't an effort been made to wipe them out?" Paul asked.
    "Too expensive," Kynes said. "Too much area to cover." 
    Paul leaned back in his corner. His truthsense, awareness of tone shadings, told him that Kynes was lying and telling half-truths. And he thought: If there's a relationship between spice and worms, killing the worms would destroy the spice.
    "No one will have to walk out of the desert soon," the Duke said. "Trip these little transmitters at our necks and rescue is on its way. All our workers will be wearing them before long. We're setting up a special rescue service." 
    "Very commendable," Kynes said.
    "Your tone says you don't agree," the Duke said.
    "Agree? Of course I agree, but it won't be much use. Static electricity from sandstorms masks out many signals. Transmitters short out. They've been tried here before, you know. Arrakis is tough on equipment. And if a worm's hunting you there's not much time. Frequently, you have no more than fifteen or twenty minutes." 
    "What would you advise?" the Duke asked. 
    "You ask my advice?" 
    "As planetologist, yes." 
    "You'd follow my advice?" 
    "If I found it sensible." 
    "Very well, my Lord. Never travel alone." 
    The Duke turned his attention from the controls. "That's all?" 
    "That's all. Never travel alone."
    "What if you're separated by a storm and forced down?" Halleck asked. "Isn't there anything you could do?" 
    "Any thing covers much territory," Kynes said. 
    "What would you do?" Paul asked.
    Kynes turned a hard stare at the boy, brought his attention back to the Duke. "I'd remember to protect the integrity of my stillsuit. If I were outside the worm zone or in rock, I'd stay with the ship. If I were down in open sand, I'd get away from the ship as fast as I could. About a thousand meters would be far enough. Then I'd hide beneath my robe. A worm would get the ship, but it might miss me." 
    "Then what?" Halleck asked.
    Kynes shrugged. "Wait for the worm to leave." 
    "That's all?" Paul asked.
    "When the worm has gone, one may try to walk out," Kynes said. "You must walk softly, avoid drum sands, tidal dust basins--head for the nearest rock zone. There are many such zones. You might make it." 
    "Drum sand?" Halleck asked.
    "A condition of sand compaction," Kynes said. "The slightest step sets it drumming. Worms always come to that." 
    "And a tidal dust basin?" the Duke asked.
    "Certain depressions in the desert have filled with dust over the centuries. Some are so vast they have currents and tides. All will swallow the unwary who step into them."
    Halleck sat back, resumed strumming the baliset. Presently, he sang:

"Wild beasts of the desert do hunt there, 
Waiting for the innocents to pass.
Oh-h-h, tempt not the gods of the desert, 
Lest you seek a lonely epitaph.
The perils of the--"

    He broke off, leaned forward. "Dust cloud ahead, Sire." 
    "I see it, Gurney." 
    "That's what we seek," Kynes said.
    Paul stretched up in the seat to peer ahead, saw a rolling yellow cloud low on the desert surface some thirty kilometers ahead.
    "One of your factory crawlers," Kynes said. "It's on the surface and that means it's on spice. The cloud is vented sand being expelled after the spice has been centrifugally removed. There's no other cloud quite like it." 
    "Aircraft over it," the Duke said.
    "I see two . . . three . . . four spotters," Kynes said. "They're watching for wormsign."
    "Wormsign?" the Duke asked.
    "A sandwave moving toward the crawler. They'll have seismic probes on the surface, too. Worms sometimes travel too deep for the wave to show." Kynes swung his gaze around the sky. "Should be a carryall wing around, but I don't see it." 
    "The worm always comes, eh?" Halleck asked. 
    "Always."
    Paul leaned forward, touched Kynes' shoulder. "How big an area does each worm stake out?" 
    Kynes frowned. The child kept asking adult questions. 
    "That depends on the size of the worm." 
    "What's the variation?" the Duke asked.
    "Big ones may control three or four hundred square kilometers. Small ones--" He broke off as the Duke kicked on the jet brakes. The ship bucked as its tail pods whispered to silence. Stub wings elongated, cupped the air. The craft became a full 'thopter as the Duke banked it, holding the wings to a gentle beat, pointing with his left hand off to the east beyond the factory crawler. 
    "Is that wormsign?" 
    Kynes leaned across the Duke to peer into the distance.
    Paul and Halleck were crowded together, looking in the same direction, and Paul noted that their escort, caught by the sudden maneuver, had surged ahead, but now was curving back. The factory crawler lay ahead of them, still some three kilometers away.
    Where the Duke pointed, crescent dune tracks spread shadow ripples toward the horizon and, running through them as a level line stretching into the distance, came an elongated mount-in-motion--a cresting of sand. It reminded Paul of the way a big fish disturbed the water when swimming just under the surface.
    "Worm," Kynes said. "Big one." He leaned back, grabbed the microphone from the panel, punched out a new frequency selection. Glancing at the grid chart on rollers over their heads, he spoke into the microphone: "Calling crawler at Delta Ajax niner. Wormsign warning. Crawler at Delta Ajax niner. Wormsign warning. Acknowledge, please." He waited.
    The panel speaker emitted static crackles, then a voice: "Who calls Delta Ajax niner? Over." 
    "They seem pretty calm about it," Halleck said.
    Kynes spoke into the microphone: "Unlisted flight--north and east of you about three kilometers. Wormsign is on intercept course, your position, estimated contact twenty-five minutes." 
    Another voice rumbled from the speaker: "This is Spotter Control. Sighting confirmed. Stand by for contact fix." There was a pause, then: "Contact in twenty-six minutes minus. That was a sharp estimate. Who's on that unlisted flight? Over." 
    Halleck had his harness off and surged forward between Kynes and the Duke. "Is this the regular working frequency, Kynes?" 
    "Yes. Why?" 
    "Who'd be listening?" 
    "Just the work crews in this area. Cuts down interference." 
    Again, the speaker crackled, then: "This is Delta Ajax niner. Who gets bonus credit for that spot? Over." 
    Halleck glanced at the Duke.
    Kynes said: "There's a bonus based on spice load for whoever gives first worm warning. They want to know--" 
    "Tell them who had first sight of that worm," Halleck said. 
    The Duke nodded.
    Kynes hesitated, then lifted the microphone; "Spotter credit to the Duke Leto Atreides. The Duke Leto Atreides. Over." 
    The voice from the speaker was flat and partly distorted by a burst of static: "We read and thank you."
    "Now, tell them to divide the bonus among themselves," Halleck ordered. "Tell them it's the Duke's wish." 
    Kynes took a deep breath, then: "It's the Duke's wish that you divide the bonus among your crew. Do you read? Over." 
    "Acknowledged and thank you," the speaker said.
    The Duke said: "I forgot to mention that Gurney is also very talented in public relations." 
    Kynes turned a puzzled frown on Halleck.
    "This lets the men know their Duke is concerned for their safety," Halleck said. "Word will get around. It was on an area working frequency--not likely Harkonnen agents heard." He glanced out at their air cover. "And we're a pretty strong force. It was a good risk."
    The Duke banked their craft toward the sandcloud erupting from the factory crawler. "What happens now?"
    "There's a carryall wing somewhere close," Kynes said. "It'll come in and lift off the crawler." 
    "What if the carryall's wrecked?" Halleck asked.
    "Some equipment is lost," Kynes said. "Get in close over the crawler, my Lord; you'll find this interesting."
    The Duke scowled, busied himself with the controls as they came into turbulent air over the crawler.
    Paul looked down, saw sand still spewing out of the metal and plastic monster beneath them. It looked like a great tan and blue beetle with many wide tracks extending on arms around it. He saw a giant inverted funnel snout poked into dark sand in front of it.
    "Rich spice bed by the color," Kynes said. "They'll continue working until the last minute."
    The Duke fed more power to the wings, stiffened them for a steeper descent as he settled lower in a circling glide above the crawler. A glance left and right showed his cover holding altitude and circling overhead.
    Paul studied the yellow cloud belching from the crawler's pipe vents, looked out over the desert at the approaching worm track.
    "Shouldn't we be hearing them call in the carryall?" Halleck asked.
    "They usually have the wing on a different frequency," Kynes said.
    "Shouldn't they have two carryalls standing by for every crawler?" the Duke asked. "There should be twenty-six men on that machine down there, not to mention cost of equipment." 
    Kynes said: "You don't have enough ex--"
    He broke off as the speaker erupted with an angry voice: "Any of you see the wing? He isn't answering."
    A garble of noise crackled from the speaker, drowned in an abrupt override signal, then silence and the first voice: "Report by the numbers! Over."
    "This is Spotter Control. Last I saw, the wing was pretty high and circling off northwest. I don't see him now. Over." 
    "Spotter one: negative. Over." 
    "Spotter two: negative. Over." 
    "Spotter three: negative. Over." 
    Silence.
    The Duke looked down. His own craft's shadow was just passing over the crawler. "Only four spotters, is that right?" 
    "Correct," Kynes said.
    "There are five in our party," the Duke said. "Our ships are larger. We can crowd in three extra each. Their spotters ought to be able to lift off two each." 
    Paul did the mental arithmetic, said: "That's three short." 
    "Why don't they have two carryalls to each crawler?" barked the Duke.
    "You don't have enough extra equipment," Kynes said. 
    "All the more reason we should protect what we have!" 
    "Where could that carryall go?" Halleck asked.
    "Could've been forced down somewhere out of sight," Kynes said.
    The Duke grabbed the microphone, hesitated with thumb poised over its switch. "How could they lose sight of a carryall?" 
    "They keep their attention on the ground looking for wormsign," Kynes said.
    The Duke thumbed the switch, spoke into the microphone. "This is your Duke. We are coming down to take off Delta Ajax niner's crew. All spotters are ordered to comply. Spotters will land on the east side. We will take the west. Over." He reached down, punched out his own command frequency, repeated the order for his own air cover, handed the microphone back to Kynes.
    Kynes returned to the working frequency and a voice blasted from the speaker: " . . . almost a full load of spice! We have almost a full load! We can't leave that for a damned worm! Over." 
    "Damn the spice!" the Duke barked. He grabbed back the microphone, said: "We can always get more spice. There are seats in our ships for all but three of you. Draw straws or decide any way you like who's to go. But you're going, and that's an order!" He slammed the microphone back into Kynes' hands, muttered: "Sorry," as Kynes shook an injured finger. 
    "How much time?" Paul asked. 
    "Nine minutes," Kynes said.
    The Duke said: "This ship has more power than the others. If we took off under jet with three-quarter wings, we could crowd in an additional man." 
    "That sand's soft," Kynes said.
    "With four extra men aboard on a jet takeoff, we could snap the wings, Sire," Halleck said.
    "Not on this ship," the Duke said. He hauled back on the controls as the 'thopter glided in beside the crawler. The wings tipped up, braked the 'thopter to a skidding stop within twenty meters of the factory.
    The crawler was silent now, no sand spouting from its vents. Only a faint mechanical rumble issued from it, becoming more audible as the Duke opened his door.
    Immediately, their nostrils were assailed by the odor of cinnamon--heavy and pungent.
    With a loud flapping, the spotter aircraft glided down to the sand on the other side of the crawler. The Duke's own escort swooped in to land in line with him.
    Paul, looking out at the factory, saw how all the 'thopters were dwarfed by it--gnats beside a warrior beetle.
    "Gurney, you and Paul toss out that rear seat," the Duke said. He manually cranked the wings out to three-quarters, set their angle, checked the jet pod controls. "Why the devil aren't they coming out of that machine?"
    "They're hoping the carryall will show up," Kynes said. "They still have a few minutes." He glanced off to the east.
    All turned to look the same direction, seeing no sign of the worm, but there was a heavy, charged feeling of anxiety in the air.
    The Duke took the microphone, punched for his command frequency, said: "Two of you toss out your shield generators. By the numbers. You can carry one more man that way. We're not leaving any men for that monster." He keyed back to the working frequency, barked: "All right, you in Delta Ajax niner! Out! Now! This is a command from your Duke! On the double or I'll cut that crawler apart with a lasgun!"
    A hatch snapped open near the front of the factory, another at the rear, another at the top. Men came tumbling out, sliding and scrambling down to the sand. A tall man in a patched working robe was the last to emerge. He jumped down to a track and then to the sand.
    The Duke hung the microphone on the panel, swung out onto the wing step, shouted: "Two men each into your spotters." 
    The man in the patched robe began lolling off pairs of his crew, pushing them toward the craft waiting on the other side.
    "Four over here!" the Duke shouted. "Four into that ship back there!" He jabbed a finger at an escort 'thopter directly behind him. The guards were just wrestling the shield generator out of it. "And four into that ship over there!" He pointed to the other escort that had shed its shield generator. "Three each into the others! Run, you sand dogs!"
    The tall man finished counting off his crew, came slogging across the sand followed by three of his companions. 
    "I hear the worm, but I can't see it," Kynes said.
    The others heard it then--an abrasive slithering, distant and growing louder.
    "Damn sloppy way to operate," the Duke muttered.
    Aircraft began flapping off the sand around them. It reminded the Duke of a time in his home planet's jungles, a sudden emergence into a clearing, and carrion birds lifting away from the carcass of a wild ox.
    The spice workers slogged up to the side of the 'thopter, started climbing in behind the Duke. Halleck helped, dragging them into the rear.
    "In you go, boys!" he snapped. "On the double!"
    Paul, crowded into a corner by sweating men, smelled the perspiration of fear, saw that two of the men had poor neck adjustments on their stillsuits. He filed the information in his memory for future action. His father would have to order tighter stillsuit discipline. Men tended to become sloppy if you didn't watch such things.
    The last man came gasping into the rear, said. "The worm! It's almost on us! Blast off!"
    The Duke slid into his seat, frowning, said: "We still have almost three minutes on the original contact estimate. Is that right, Kynes?" He shut his door, checked it.
    "Almost exactly, my Lord," Kynes said, and he thought: A cool one, this duke.
    "All secure here, Sire," Halleck said.
    The Duke nodded, watched the last of his escort take off. He adjusted the igniter, glanced once more at wings and instruments, punched the jet sequence.
    The take-off pressed the Duke and Kynes deep into their seats, compressed the people in the rear. Kynes watched the way the Duke handled the controls--gently, surely. The 'thopter was fully airborne now, and the Duke studied his instruments, glanced left and right at his wings.
    "She's very heavy, Sire," Halleck said.
    "Well within the tolerances of this ship," the Duke said. "You didn't really think I'd risk this cargo, did you, Gurney?" 
    Halleck grinned, said: "Not a bit of it, Sire."
    The Duke banked his craft in a long easy curve--climbing over the crawler.
    Paul, crushed into a corner beside a window, stared down at the silent machine on the sand. The wormsign had broken off about four hundred meters from the crawler. And now, there appeared to be turbulence in the sand around the factory.
    "The worm is now beneath the crawler," Kynes said. "You are about to witness a thing few have seen."
    Flecks of dust shadowed the sand around the crawler now. The big machine began to tip down to the right. A gigantic sand whirlpool began forming there to the right of the crawler. It moved faster and faster. Sand and dust filled the air now for hundreds of meters around.
    Then they saw it!
    A wide hole emerged from the sand. Sunlight flashed from glistening white spokes within it. The hole's diameter was at least twice the length of the crawler, Paul estimated. He watched as the machine slid into that opening in a billow of dust and sand. The hole pulled back.
    "Gods, what a monster!" muttered a man beside Paul. 
    "Got all our floggin' spice!" growled another.
    "Someone is going to pay for this," the Duke said. "I promise you that."
    By the very flatness of his father's voice, Paul sensed the deep anger. He found that he shared it. This was criminal waste! 
    In the silence that followed, they heard Kynes.
    "Bless the Maker and His water," Kynes murmured. "Bless the coming and going of Him. May His passage cleanse the world. May He keep the world for His people." 
    "What's that you're saying?" the Duke asked. 
    But Kynes remained silent.
    Paul glanced at the men crowded around him. They were staring fearfully at the back of Kynes' head. One of them whispered: "Liet." 
    Kynes turned, scowling. The man sank back, abashed.
    Another of the rescued men began coughing--dry and rasping. Presently, he gasped: "Curse this hell hole!"
    The tall Dune man who had come last out of the crawler said; "Be you still, Coss. You but worsen your cough." He stirred among the men until he could look through them at the back of the Duke's head. "You be the Duke Leto, I warrant," he said. "It's to you we give thanks for our lives. We were ready to end it there until you came along." 
    "Quiet, man, and let the Duke fly his ship," Halleck muttered.
    Paul glanced at Halleck. He, too, had seen the tension wrinkles at the corner of his father's jaw. One walked softly when the Duke was in a rage.
    Leto began easing his 'thopter out of its great banking circle, stopped at a new sign of movement on the sand. The worm had withdrawn into the depths and now, near where the crawler had been, two figures could be seen moving north away from the sand depression. They appeared to glide over the surface with hardly a lifting of dust to mark their passage.
    "Who's that down there?" the Duke barked.
    "Two Johnnies who came along for the ride, Soor," said the tall Dune man.
    "Why wasn't something said about them?" 
    "It was the chance they took, Soor," the Dune man said. 
    "My Lord," said Kynes, "these men know it's of little use to do anything about men trapped on the desert in worm country." 
    "We'll send a ship from base for them!" the Duke snapped.
    "As you wish, my Lord," Kynes said. "But likely when the ship gets here there'll be no one to rescue." 
    "We'll send a ship, anyway," the Duke said.
    "They were right beside where the worm came up," Paul said. "How'd they escape?"
    "The sides of the hole cave in and make the distances deceptive," Kynes said.
    "You waste fuel here, Sire," Halleck ventured. 
    "Aye, Gurney."
    The Duke brought his craft around toward the Shield Wall. His escort came down from circling stations, took up positions above and on both sides.
    Paul thought about what the Dune man and Kynes had said. He sensed half-truths, outright lies. The men on the sand had glided across the surface so surely, moving in a way obviously calculated to keep from luring the worm back out of its depths.
    Fremen! Paul thought. Who else would be so sure on the sand? Who else might be left out of your worries as a matter of course--because they are in no danger? They know how to live here! They know how to outwit the worm!
    "What were Fremen doing on that crawler?" Paul asked. 
    Kynes whirled.
    The tall Dune man turned wide eyes on Paul--blue within blue within blue. "Who be this lad?" he asked.
    Halleck moved to place himself between the man and Paul, said: "This is Paul Atreides, the ducal heir."
    "Why says he there were Fremen on our rumbler?" the man asked.
    "They fit the description," Paul said.
    Kynes snorted. "You can't tell Fremen just by looking at them!" He looked at the Dune man. "You. Who were those men?" 
    "Friends of one of the others," the Dune man said. "Just friends from a village who wanted to see the spice sands." 
    Kynes turned away. "Fremen!"
    But he was remembering the words of the legend: "The Lisan al-Gaib shall see through all subterfuge."
    "They be dead now, most likely, young Soor," the Dune man said. "We should not speak unkindly on them."
    But Paul heard the falsehood in their voices, felt the menace that had brought Halleck instinctively into guarding position.
    Paul spoke dryly: "A terrible place for them to die."
    Without turning, Kynes said; "When God hath ordained a creature to die in a particular place. He causeth that creature's wants to direct him to that place." 
    Leto turned a hard stare at Kynes.
    And Kynes, returning the stare, found himself troubled by a fact he had observed here: This Duke was concerned more over the men that he was over the spice. He risked his own life and that of his son to save the men. He passed off the loss of a spice crawler with a gesture. The threat to men's lives had him in a rage. A leader such as that would command fanatic loyalty. He would be difficult to defeat.
    Against his own will and all previous judgments, Kynes admitted to himself: I like this Duke.

= = = = = =

Greatness is a transitory experience. It is never consistent. It depends in part upon the myth-making imagination of humankind. The person who experiences greatness must have a feeling for the myth he is in. He must reflect what is projected upon him. And he must have a strong sense of the sardonic. This is what uncouples him from belief in his own pretensions. The sardonic is all that permits him to move within himself. Without this quality, even occasional greatness will destroy a man.
-from "Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    In the dining hall of the Arrakeen great house, suspensor lamps had been lighted against the early dark. They cast their yellow glows upward onto the black bull's head with its bloody horns, and onto the darkly glistening oil painting of the Old Duke.
    Beneath these talismans, white linen shone around the burnished reflections of the Atreides silver, which had been placed in precise arrangements along the great table--little archipelagos of service waiting beside crystal glasses, each setting squared off before a heavy wooden chair. The classic central chandelier remained unlighted, and its chain twisted upward into shadows where the mechanism of the poison-snooper had been concealed.
    Pausing in the doorway to inspect the arrangements, the Duke thought about the poison-snooper and what it signified in his society.
    All of a pattern, he thought. You can plumb us by our language--the precise and delicate delineations for ways to administer treacherous death. Will someone try chaumurky tonight--poison in the drink? Or will it be chaumas--poison in the food?
    He shook his head.
    Beside each plate on the long table stood a flagon of water. There was enough water along the table, the Duke estimated, to keep a poor Arrakeen family for more than a year.
    Flanking the doorway in which he stood were broad laving basins of ornate yellow and green tile. Each basin had its rack of towels. It was the custom, the housekeeper had explained, for guests as they entered to dip their hands ceremoniously into a basin, slop several cups of water onto the floor, dry their hands on a towel and fling the towel into the growing puddle at the door. After the dinner, beggars gathered outside to get the water squeezings from the towels.
    How typical of a Harkonnen fief, the Duke thought. Every degradation of the spirit that can be conceived. He took a deep breath, feeling rage tighten his stomach. 
    "The custom stops here!" he muttered.
    He saw a serving woman--one of the old and gnarled ones the housekeeper had recommended--hovering at the doorway from the kitchen across from him. The Duke signaled with upraised hand. She moved out of the shadows, scurried around the table toward him, and he noted the leathery face, the blue-within-blue eyes. 
    "My Lord wishes?" She kept her head bowed, eyes shielded. 
    He gestured. "Have these basins and towels removed." 
    "But . . . Noble Born . . ." She looked up, mouth gaping.
    "I know the custom!" he barked. "Take these basins to the front door. While we're eating and until we've finished, each beggar who calls may have a full cup of water. Understood?" 
    Her leathery face displayed a twisting of emotions: dismay, anger . . .
    With sudden insight, Leto realized that she must have planned to sell the water squeezings from the foot-trampled towels, wringing a few coppers from the wretches who came to the door. Perhaps that also was a custom.
    His face clouded, and he growled: "I'm posting a guard to see that my orders are carried out to the letter."
    He whirled, strode back down the passage to the Great Hall. Memories rolled in his mind like the toothless mutterings of old women. He remembered open water and waves--days of grass instead of sand--dazed summers that had whipped past him like windstorm leaves. 
    All gone.
    I'm getting old, he thought. I've felt the cold hand of my mortality. And in what? An old woman's greed.
    In the Great Hall, the Lady Jessica was the center of a mixed group standing in front of the fireplace. An open blaze crackled there, casting flickers of orange light onto jewels and laces and costly fabrics. He recognized in the group a stillsuit manufacturer down from Carthag, an electronics equipment importer, a water-shipper whose summer mansion was near his polar-cap factory, a representative of the Guild Bank (lean and remote, that one), a dealer in replacement parts for spice mining equipment, a thin and hard-faced woman whose escort service for off-planet visitors reputedly operated as cover for various smuggling, spying, and blackmail operations.
    Most of the women in the hall seemed cast from a specific type--decorative, precisely turned out, an odd mingling of untouchable sensuousness.
    Even without her position as hostess, Jessica would have dominated the group, he thought. She wore no jewelry and had chosen warm colors--a long dress almost the shade of the open blaze, and an earth-brown band around her bronzed hair.
    He realized she had done this to taunt him subtly, a reproof against his recent pose of coldness. She was well aware that he liked her best in these shades--that he saw her as a rustling of warm colors.
    Nearby, more an outflanker than a member of the group, stood Duncan Idaho in glittering dress uniform, flat face unreadable, the curling black hair neatly combed. He had been summoned back from the Fremen and had his orders from Hawat--"Under pretext of guarding her, you will keep the Lady Jessica under constant surveillance." 
    The Duke glanced around the room.
    There was Paul in the corner surrounded by a fawning group of the younger Arrakeen richece, and, aloof among them, three officers of the House Troop. The Duke took particular note of the young women. What a catch a ducal heir would make. But Paul was treating all equally with an air of reserved nobility.
    He'll wear the title well, the Duke thought, and realized with a sudden chill that this was another death thought.
    Paul saw his father in the doorway, avoided his eyes. He looked around at the clusterings of guests, the jeweled hands clutching drinks (and the unobtrusive inspections with tiny remote-cast snoopers). Seeing all the chattering faces, Paul was suddenly repelled by them. They were cheap masks locked on festering thoughts--voices gabbling to drown out the loud silence in every breast.
    I'm in a sour mood, he thought, and wondered what Gurney would say to that.
    He knew his mood's source. He hadn't wanted to attend this function, but his father had been firm. "You have a place--a position to uphold. You're old enough to do this. You're almost a man."
    Paul saw his father emerge from the doorway, inspect the room, then cross to the group around the Lady Jessica.
    As Leto approached Jessica's group, the water-shipper was asking: "Is it true the Duke will put in weather control?" 
    From behind the man, the Duke said: "We haven't gone that far in our thinking, sir."
    The man turned, exposing a bland round face, darkly tanned. "Ah-h, the Duke," he said. "We missed you."
    Leto glanced at Jessica. "A thing needed doing." He returned his attention to the water-shipper, explained what he had ordered for the laving basins, adding: "As far as I'm concerned, the old custom ends now." 
    "Is this a ducal order, m'Lord?" the man asked.
    "I leave that to your own . . . ah . . . conscience," the Duke said. He turned, noting Kynes come up to the group.
    One of the women said: "I think it's a very generous gesture--giving water to the--" Someone shushed her.
    The Duke looked at Kynes, noting that the planetologist wore an old-style dark brown uniform with epaulets of the Imperial Civil Servant and a tiny gold teardrop of rank at his collar.
    The water-shipper asked in an angry voice: "Does the Duke imply criticism of our custom?"
    "This custom has been changed," Leto said. He nodded to Kynes, marked the frown on Jessica's face, thought: A frown does not become her, but it'll increase rumors of friction between us.
    "With the Duke's permission," the water-shipper said, "I'd like to inquire further about customs."
    Leto heard the sudden oily tone in the man's voice, noted the watchful silence in this group, the way heads were beginning to turn toward them around the room.
    "Isn't it almost time for dinner?" Jessica asked.
    "But our guest has some questions," Leto said. And he looked at the water-shipper, seeing a round-faced man with large eyes and thick lips, recalling Hawat's memorandum: ". . . and this water-shipper is a man to watch--Lingar Bewt, remember the name. The Harkonnens used him but never fully controlled him." 
    "Water customs are so interesting," Bewt said, and there was a smile on his face. "I'm curious what you intend about the conservatory attached to this house. Do you intend to continue flaunting it in the people's faces . . . m'Lord?"
    Leto held anger in check, staring at the man. Thoughts raced through his mind. It had taken bravery to challenge him in his own ducal castle, especially since they now had Bewt's signature over a contract of allegiance. The action had taken, also, a knowledge of personal power. Water was, indeed, power here. If water facilities were mined, for instance, ready to be destroyed at a signal . . . The man looked capable of such a thing. Destruction of water facilities might well destroy Arrakis. That could well have been the club this Bewt held over the Harkonnens.
    "My Lord, the Duke, and I have other plans for our conservatory," Jessica said. She smiled at Leto. "We intend to keep it, certainly, but only to hold it in trust for the people of Arrakis. It is our dream that someday the climate of Arrakis may be changed sufficiently to grow such plants anywhere in the open." 
    Bless her! Leto thought. Let our water-shipper chew on that.
    "Your interest in water and weather control is obvious," the Duke said. "I'd advise you to diversify your holdings. One day, water will not be a precious commodity on Arrakis." 
    And he thought: Hawat must redouble his efforts at infiltrating this Bewt's organization. And we must start on stand-by water facilities at once. No man is going to hold a club over my head!
    Bewt nodded, the smile still on his face. "A commendable dream, my Lord." He withdrew a pace.
    Leto's attention was caught by the expression on Kynes' face. The man was staring at Jessica. He appeared transfigured--like a man in love . . . or caught in a religious trance.
    Kynes' thoughts were overwhelmed at last by the words of prophecy: "And they shall share your most precious dream. "He spoke directly to Jessica: "Do you bring the shortening of the way?"
    "Ah, Dr. Kynes," the water-shipper said. "You've come in from tramping around with your mobs of Fremen. How gracious of you."
    Kynes passed an unreadable glance across Bewt, said: "It is said in the desert that possession of water in great amount can inflict a man with fatal carelessness."
    "They have many strange sayings in the desert," Bewt said, but his voice betrayed uneasiness.
    Jessica crossed to Leto, slipped her hand under his arm to gain a moment in which to calm herself. Kynes had said: " . . . the shortening of the way." In the old tongue, the phrase translated as "Kwisatz Haderach." The planetologist's odd question seemed to have gone unnoticed by the others, and now Kynes was bending over one of the consort women, listening to a low-voiced coquetry.
    Kwisatz Haderach, Jessica thought. Did our Missionaria Protectiva plant that legend here, too? The thought fanned her secret hope for Paul. He could be the Kwisatz Haderach. He could be.
    The Guild Bank representative had fallen into conversation with the water-shipper, and Bewt's voice lifted above the renewed hum of conversations: "Many people have sought to change Arrakis." 
    The Duke saw how the words seemed to pierce Kynes, jerking the planetologist upright and away from the flirting woman.
    Into the sudden silence, a house trooper in uniform of a footman cleared his throat behind Leto, said: "Dinner is served, my Lord." 
    The Duke directed a questioning glance down at Jessica.
    "The custom here is for host and hostess to follow their guests to table," She said, and smiled; "Shall we change that one, too, my Lord?"
    He spoke coldly: "That seems a goodly custom. We shall let it stand for now."
    The illusion that I suspect her of treachery must be maintained, he thought. He glanced at the guests filing past them. Who among you believes this lie?
    Jessica, sensing his remoteness, wondered at it as she had done frequently the past week. He acts like a man struggling with himself, she thought. Is it because I moved so swiftly setting up this dinner party? Yet, he knows how important it is that we begin to mix our officers and men with the locals on a social plane. We are father and mother surrogate to them all. Nothing impresses that fact more firmly than this sort of social sharing.
    Leto, watching the guests file past, recalled what Thufir Hawat had said when informed of the affair: "Sire! I forbid it!" 
    A grim smile touched the Duke's mouth. What a scene that had been. And when the Duke had remained adamant about attending the dinner. Hawat had shaken his head. "I have bad feelings about this, my Lord," he'd said. "Things move too swiftly on Arrakis. That's not like the Harkonnens. Not like them at all." 
    Paul passed his father escorting a young woman half a head taller than himself. He shot a sour glance at his father, nodded at something the young woman said.
    "Her father manufactures stillsuits," Jessica said. "I'm told that only a fool would be caught in the deep desert wearing one of the man's suits."
    "Who's the man with the scarred face ahead of Paul?" the Duke asked. "I don't place him."
    "A late addition to the list," she whispered. "Gurney arranged the invitation. Smuggler." 
    "Gurney arranged?"
    "At my request. It was cleared with Hawat, although I thought Hawat was a little stiff about it. The smuggler's called Tuek, Esmar Tuek. He's a power among his kind. They all know him here. He's dined at many of the houses." 
    "Why is he here?"
    "Everyone here will ask that question," she said. "Tuek will sow doubt and suspicion just by his presence. He'll also serve notice that you're prepared to back up your orders against graft--by enforcement from the smugglers' end as well. This was the point Hawat appeared to like."
    "I'm not sure I like it." He nodded to a passing couple, saw only a few of their guests remained to precede them. "Why didn't you invite some Fremen?" 
    "There's Kynes," she said.
    "Yes, there's Kynes," he said. "Have you arranged any other little surprises for me?" He led her into step behind the procession. 
    "All else is most conventional," she said.
    And she thought: My darling, can't you see that this smuggler controls fast ships, that he can be bribed? We must have a way out, a door of escape from Arrakis if all else fails us here.
    As they emerged into the dining hall, she disengaged her arm, allowed Leto to seat her. He strode to his end of the table. A footman held his chair for him. The others settled with a swishing of fabrics, a scraping of chairs, but the Duke remained standing. He gave a hand signal, and the house troopers in footman uniform around the table stepped back, standing at attention. 
    Uneasy silence settled over the room.
    Jessica, looking down the length of the table, saw a faint trembling at the corners of Leto's mouth, noted the dark flush of anger on his cheeks. What has angered him? she asked herself. Surely not my invitation to the smuggler.
    "Some question my changing of the laving basin custom," Leto said. "This is my way of telling you that many things will change." 
    Embarrassed silence settled over the table. 
    They think him drunk, Jessica thought.
    Leto lifted his water flagon, held it aloft where the suspensor, lights shot beams of reflection off it. "As a Chevalier of the Imperium, then," he said, "I give you a toast."
    The others grasped their flagons, all eyes focused on the Duke. In the sudden stillness, a suspensor light drifted slightly in an errant breeze from the serving kitchen hallway. Shadows played across the Duke's hawk features.
    "Here I am and here I remain!" he barked.
    There was an abortive movement of flagons toward mouths--stopped as the Duke remained with arm upraised. "My toast is one of those maxims so dear to our hearts: 'Business makes progress! Fortune passes everywhere!' " 
    He sipped his water.
    The others joined him. Questioning glances passed among them. 
    "Gurney!" the Duke called.
    From an alcove at Leto's end of the room came Halleck's voice. "Here, my Lord." 
    "Give us a tune, Gurney."
    A minor chord from the baliset floated out of the alcove. Servants began putting plates of food on the table at the Duke's gesture releasing them--roast desert hare in sauce cepeda, aplomage sirian, chukka under glass, coffee with melange (a rich cinnamon odor from the spice wafted across the table), a true pot-a-oie served with sparkling Caladan wine.
    Still, the Duke remained standing.
    As the guests waited, their attention torn between the dishes placed before them and the standing Duke, Leto said: "In olden times, it was the duty of the host to entertain his guests with his own talents." His knuckles turned white, so fiercely did he grip his water flagon. "I cannot sing, but I give you the words of Gurney's song. Consider it another toast--a toast to all who've died bringing us to this station." 
    An uncomfortable stirring sounded around the table.
    Jessica lowered her gaze, glanced at the people seated nearest her--there was the round-faced water-shipper and his woman, the pale and austere Guild Bank representative (he seemed a whistle-faced scarecrow with his eyes fixed on Leto), the rugged and scar-faced Tuck, his blue-within-blue eyes downcast.
    "Review, friends--troops long past review," the Duke intoned. "All to fate a weight of pains and dollars. Their spirits wear our silver collars. Review, friends--troops long past review: Each a dot of time without pretense or guile. With them passes the lure of fortune. Review, friends--troops long past review. When our time ends on its rictus smile, we'll pass the lure of fortune." 
    The Duke allowed his voice to trail off on the last line, took a deep drink from his water flagon, slammed it back onto the table. Water slopped over the brim onto the linen. 
    The others drank in embarrassed silence.
    Again, the Duke lifted his water flagon, and this time emptied its remaining half onto the floor, knowing that the others around the table must do the same.
    Jessica was first to follow his example.
    There was a frozen moment before the others began emptying their flagons. Jessica saw how Paul, seated near his father, was studying the reactions around him. She found herself also fascinated by what her guests' actions revealed--especially among the women. This was clean, potable water, not something already cast away in a sopping towel. Reluctance to just discard it exposed itself in trembling hands, delayed reactions' nervous laughter . . . and violent obedience to the necessity. One woman dropped her flagon, looked the other way as her male companion recovered it.
    Kynes, though, caught her attention most sharply. The planetotogist hesitated, then emptied his flagon into a container beneath his jacket. He smiled at Jessica as he caught her watching him, raised the empty flagon to her in a silent toast. He appeared completely unembarrassed by his action.
    Halleck's music still wafted over the room, but it had come out of its minor key, lilting and lively now as though he were trying to lift the mood.
    "Let the dinner commence," the Duke said, and sank into his chair.
    He's angry and uncertain, Jessica thought. The loss of that factory crawler hit him more deeply than it should have. It must be something more than that loss. He acts like a desperate man. She lifted her fork, hoping in the motion to hide her own sudden bitterness. Why not? He is desperate.
    Slowly at first, then with increasing animation, the dinner got under way. The stillsuit manufacturer complimented Jessica on her chef and wine.
    "We brought both from Caladan," she said.
    "Superb!" he said, tasting the chukka. "Simply superb! And not a hint of melange in it. One gets so tired of the spice in everything." 
    The Guild Bank representative looked across at Kynes. "I understand, Doctor Kynes, that another factory crawler has been lost to a worm." 
    "News' travels fast," the Duke said.
    "Then it's true?" the banker asked, shifting his attention to Leto.
    "Of course, it's true!" the Duke snapped. "The blasted carry-all disappeared. It shouldn't be possible for anything that big to disappear!"
    "When the worm came, there was nothing to recover the crawler," Kynes said.
    "It should not be possible!" the Duke repeated. 
    "No one saw the carryall leave?" the banker asked.
    "Spotters customarily keep their eyes on the sand," Kynes said. "They're primarily interested in wormsign. A carryall's complement usually is four men--two pilots and two journeymen attachers. If one--or even two of this crew were in the pay of the Duke's foes--"
    "Ah-h-h, I see," the banker said. "And you, as Judge of the Change, do you challenge this?"
    "I shall have to consider my position carefully," Kynes said, "and I certainly will not discuss it at table." And he thought: That pale skeleton of a man! He knows this is the kind of infraction I was instructed to ignore.
    The banker smiled, returned his attention to his food.
    Jessica sat remembering a lecture from her Bene Gesserit school days. The subject had been espionage and counter-espionage. A plump, happy-faced Reverend Mother had been the lecturer, her jolly voice contrasting weirdly with the subject matter.
    A thing to note about any espionage and/or counter-espionage school is the similar basic reaction pattern of all its graduates. Any enclosed discipline sets its stamp, its pattern, upon its students. That pattern is susceptible to analysis and prediction.
    "Now, motivational patterns are going to be similar among all espionage agents. That is to say: there will be certain types of motivation that are similar despite differing schools or opposed aims. You will study first how to separate this element for your analysis--in the beginning, through interrogation patterns that betray the inner orientation of the interrogators; secondly, by close observation of language-thought orientation of those under analysis. You will find it fairly simple to determine the root languages of your subjects, of course, both through voice inflection and speech pattern."
    Now, sitting at table with her son and her Duke and their guests, hearing that Guild Bank representative, Jessica felt a chill of realization: the man was a Harkonnen agent. He had the Giedi Prime speech pattern--subtly masked, but exposed to her trained awareness as though he had announced himself.
    Does this mean the Guild itself has taken sides against House Atreides? she asked herself. The thought shocked her, and she masked her emotion by calling for a new dish, all the while listening for the man to betray his purpose. He will shift the conversation next to something seemingly innocent, but with ominous overtones, she told herself. It's his pattern.
    The banker swallowed, took a sip of wine, smiled at something said to him by the woman on his right. He seemed to listen for a moment to a man down the table who was explaining to the Duke that native Arrakeen plants had no thorns.
    "I enjoy watching the flights of birds on Arrakis," the banker said, directing his words at Jessica. "All of our birds, of course, are carrion-eaters, and many exist without water, having become blood-drinkers."
    The stillsuit manufacturer's daughter, seated between Paul and his father at the other end of the table, twisted her pretty face into a frown, said: "Oh, Soo-Soo, you say the most disgusting things." 
    The banker smiled. "They call me Soo-Soo because I'm financial adviser to the Water Peddlers Union." And, as Jessica continued to look at him without comment, he added: "Because of the water-sellers' cry--'Soo-Soo Sook!' " And he imitated the call with such accuracy that many around the table laughed.
    Jessica heard the boastful tone of voice, but noted most that the young woman had spoken on cue--a set piece. She had produced the excuse for the banker to say what he had said. She glanced at Lingar Bewt. The water magnate was scowling, concentrating on his dinner. It came to Jessica that the banker had said: "I, too, control that ultimate source of power on Arrakis--water." 
    Paul had marked the falseness in his dinner companion's voice, saw that his mother was following the conversation with Bene Gesserit intensity. On impulse, he decided to play the foil, draw the exchange out. He addressed himself to the banker. 
    "Do you mean, sir, that these birds are cannibals?" 
    "That's an odd question, young Master," the banker said. "I merely said the birds drink blood. It doesn't have to be the blood of their own kind, does it?"
    "It was not an odd question," Paul said, and Jessica noted the brittle riposte quality of her training exposed in his voice. "Most educated people know that the worst potential competition for any young organism can come from its own kind." He deliberately forked a bite of food from his companion's plate, ate it. "They are eating from the same bowl. They have the same basic requirements." 
    The banker stiffened, scowled at the Duke.
    "Do not make the error of considering my son a child," the Duke said. And he smiled.
    Jessica glanced around the table, noted that Bewt had brightened, that both Kynes and the smuggler, Tuek, were grinning.
    "It's a rule of ecology," Kynes said, "that the young Master appears to understand quite well. The struggle between life elements is the struggle for the free energy of a system. Blood's an efficient energy source."
    The banker put down his fork, spoke in an angry voice: "It's said that the Fremen scum drink the blood of their dead." 
    Kynes shook his head, spoke in a lecturing tone: "Not the blood, sir. But all of a man's water, ultimately, belongs to his people--to his tribe. It's a necessity when you live near the Great Flat. All water's precious there, and the human body is composed of some seventy per cent water by weight. A dead man, surely, no longer requires that water."
    The banker put both hands against the table beside his plate, and Jessica thought he was going to push himself back, leave in a rage.
    Kynes looked at Jessica. "Forgive me, my Lady, for elaborating on such an ugly subject at table, but you were being told falsehood and it needed clarifying."
    "You've associated so long with Fremen that you've lost all sensibilities," the banker rasped.
    Kynes looked at him calmly, studied the pale, trembling face. "Are you challenging me, sir?"
    The banker froze. He swallowed, spoke stiffly: "Of course not. I'd not so insult our host and hostess."
    Jessica heard the fear in the man's voice, saw it in his face, in his breathing, in the pulse of a vein at his temple. The man was terrified of Kynes!
    "Our host and hostess are quite capable of deciding for themselves when they've been insulted," Kynes said. "They're brave people who understand defense of honor. We all may attest to their courage by the fact that they are here . . . now . . . on Arrakis."
    Jessica saw that Leto was enjoying this. Most of the others were not. People all around the table sat poised for flight, hands out of sight under the table. Two notable exceptions were Bewt, who was openly smiling at the banker's discomfiture, and the smuggler, Tuek, who appeared to be watching Kynes for a cue. Jessica saw that Paul was looking at Kynes in admiration. 
    "Well?" Kynes said.
    "I meant no offense," the banker muttered. "If offense was taken, please accept my apologies."
    "Freely given, freely accepted," Kynes said. He smiled at Jessica, resumed eating as though nothing had happened.
    Jessica saw that the smuggler, too, had relaxed. She marked this: the man had shown every aspect of an aide ready to leap to Kynes' assistance. There existed an accord of some sort between Kynes and Tuek.
    Leto toyed with a fork, looked speculatively at Kynes. The Geologist's manner indicated a change in attitude toward the House of Atreides. Kynes had seemed colder on their trip over the desert.
    Jessica signaled for another course of food and drink. Servants appeared with langues de lapins de garenne--red wine and a sauce of mushroom-yeast on the side.
    Slowly, the dinner conversation resumed, but Jessica heard the agitation in it, the brittle quality, saw that the banker ate in sullen silence. Kynes would have killed him without hesitating, she thought. And she realized that there was an offhand attitude toward killing in Kynes' manner. He was a casual killer, and she guessed that this was a Fremen quality.
    Jessica turned to the stillsuit manufacturer on her left, said: "I find myself continually amazed by the importance of water on Arrakis."
    "Very important," he agreed. "What is this dish? It's delicious."
    "Tongues of wild rabbit in a special sauce," she said. "A very old recipe." 
    "I must have that recipe," the man said. 
    She nodded. "I'll see that you get it."
    Kynes looked at Jessica, said: "The newcomer to Arrakis frequently underestimates the importance of water here. You are dealing, you see, with the Law of the Minimum." 
    She heard the testing quality in his voice, said, "Growth is limited by that necessity which is present in the least amount. And, naturally, the least favorable condition controls the growth rate." 
    "It's rare to find members of a Great House aware of planetological problems," Kynes said. "Water is the least favorable condition for life on Arrakis. And remember that growth itself can produce unfavorable conditions unless treated with extreme care."
    Jessica sensed a hidden message in Kynes' words, but knew she was missing it. "Growth," she said. "Do you mean Arrakis can have an orderly cycle of water to sustain human life under more favorable conditions?" 
    "Impossible!" the water magnate barked. 
    Jessica turned her attention to Bewt. "Impossible?" 
    "Impossible on Arrakis," he said. "Don't listen to this dreamer. All the laboratory evidence is against him."
    Kynes looked at Bewt, and Jessica noted that the other conversations around the table had stopped while people concentrated on this new interchange.
    "Laboratory evidence tends to blind us to a very simple fact," Kynes said. "That fact is this: we are dealing here with matters that originated and exist out-of-doors where plants and animals carry on their normal existence." 
    "Normal!" Bewt snorted. "Nothing about Arrakis is normal!" 
    "Quite the contrary," Kynes said. "Certain harmonies could be set up here along self-sustaining lines. You merely have to understand the limits of the planet and the pressures upon it." 
    "It'll never be done," Bewt said.
    The Duke came to a sudden realization, placing the point where Kynes' attitude had changed--it had been when Jessica had spoken of holding the conservatory plants in trust for Arrakis.
    "What would it take to set up the self-sustaining system, Doctor Kynes?" Leto asked.
    "If we can get three per cent of the green plant element on Arrakis involved in forming carbon compounds as foodstuffs, we've started the cyclic system," Kynes said.
    "Water's the only problem?" the Duke asked. He sensed Kynes' excitement, felt himself caught up in it.
    "Water overshadows the other problems," Kynes said. "This planet has much oxygen without its usual concomitants--widespread plant life and large sources of free carbon dioxide from such phenomena as volcanoes. There are unusual chemical interchanges over large surf ace areas here." 
    "Do you have pilot projects?" the Duke asked.
    "We've had a long time in which to build up the Tansley Effect--small-unit experiments on an amateur basis from which my science may now draw its working facts." Kynes said.
    "There isn't enough water," Bewt said. "There just isn't enough water."
    "Master Bewt is an expert on water," Kynes said. He smiled, turned back to his dinner.
    The Duke gestured sharply down with his right hand, barked: "No! I want an answer! Is there enough water, Doctor Kynes?" 
    Kynes stared at his plate.
    Jessica watched the play of emotion on his face. He masks himself well, she thought, but she had him registered now and read that he regretted his words.
    "Is there enough water?" the Duke demanded. 
    "There . . . maybe," Kynes said. 
    He's faking uncertainty! Jessica thought.
    With his deeper truthsense, Paul caught the underlying motive, had to use every ounce of his training to mask his excitement. There is enough water! But Kynes doesn't wish it to be known.
    "Our planetologist has many interesting dreams," Bewt said. "He dreams with the Fremen--of prophecies and messiahs." 
    Chuckles sounded at odd places around the table Jessica marked them--the smuggler, the stillsuit manufacturer's daughter, Duncan Idaho, the woman with the mysterious escort service.
    Tensions are oddly distributed here tonight, Jessica thought. There's too much going on of which I'm not aware. I'll have to develop new information sources.
    The Duke passed his gaze from Kynes to Bewt to Jessica. He felt oddly let down, as though something vital had passed him here. "May be," he muttered.
    Kynes spoke quickly: "Perhaps we should discuss this another time, my Lord. There are so many--"
    The planetologist broke off as an uniformed Atreides trooper hurried in through the service door, was passed by the guard and rushed to the Duke's side. The man bent, whispering into Leto's ear.
    Jessica recognized the capsign of Hawat's corps, fought down uneasiness. She addressed herself to the stillsuit manufacturer's feminine companion--a tiny, dark-haired woman with a doll face, a touch of epicanthic fold to the eyes.
    "You've hardly touched your dinner, my dear," Jessica said. "May I order you something?"
    The woman looked at the stillsuit manufacturer before answering, then: "I'm not very hungry."
    Abruptly, the Duke stood up beside his trooper, spoke in a harsh tone of command: "Stay seated, everyone. You will have to forgive me, but a matter has arisen that requires my personal attention." He stepped aside. "Paul, take over as host for me, if you please." 
    Paul stood, wanting to ask why his father had to leave, knowing he had to play this with the grand manner. He moved around to his father's chair, sat down in it.
    The Duke turned to the alcove where Halleck sat, said: "Gurney, please take Paul's place at table. We mustn't have an odd number here. When the dinner's over, I may want you to bring Paul to the field C.P. Wait for my call."
    Halleck emerged from the alcove in dress uniform, his lumpy ugliness seeming out of place in the glittering finery. He leaned his baliset against the wall, crossed to the chair Paul had occupied, sat down.
    "There's no need for alarm," the Duke said, "but I must ask that no one leave until our house guard says it's safe. You will be perfectly secure as long as you remain here, and we'll have this little trouble cleared up very shortly."
    Paul caught the code words in his father's message--guard-safe-secure-shortly. The problem was security, not violence. He saw that his mother had read the same message. They both relaxed.
    The Duke gave a short nod, wheeled and strode through the service door followed by his trooper.
    Paul said: "Please go on with your dinner. I believe Doctor Kynes was discussing water." 
    "May we discuss it another time?" Kynes asked. 
    "By all means," Paul said.
    And Jessica noted with pride her son's dignity, the mature sense of assurance.
    The banker picked up his water flagon, gestured with it at Bewt. "None of us here can surpass Master Lingar Bewt in flowery phrases. One might almost assume he aspired to Great House status. Come, Master Bewt, lead us in a toast. Perhaps you've a dollop of wisdom for the boy who must be treated like a man." 
    Jessica clenched her right hand into a fist beneath the table. She saw a handsignal pass from Halleck to Idaho, saw the house troopers along the walls move into positions of maximum guard. 
    Bewt cast a venomous glare at the banker.
    Paul glanced at Halleck, took in the defensive positions of his guards, looked at the banker until the man lowered the water flagon. He said: "Once, on Caladan, I saw the body of a drowned fisherman recovered. He--"
    "Drowned?" It was the stillsuit manufacturer's daughter.
    Paul hesitated, then: "Yes. Immersed in water until dead. Drowned." 
    "What an interesting way to die," she murmured.
    Paul's smile became brittle. He returned his attention to the banker. "The interesting thing about this man was the wounds on his shoulders--made by another fisherman's claw-boots. This fisherman was one of several in a boat--a craft for traveling on water--that foundered . . . sank beneath the water. Another fisherman helping recover the body said he'd seen marks like this man's wounds several times. They meant another drowning fisherman had tried to stand on this poor fellow's shoulders in the attempt to reach up to the surface--to reach air." 
    "Why is this interesting?" the banker asked.
    "Because of an observation made by my father at the time. He said the drowning man who climbs on your shoulders to save himself is understandable--except when you see it happen in the drawing room." Paul hesitated just long enough for the banker to see the point coming, then: "And, I should add, except when you see it at the dinner table." 
    A sudden stillness enfolded the room.
    That was rash, Jessica thought. This banker might have enough rank to call my son out. She saw that Idaho was poised for instant action. The House troopers were alert. Gurney Halleck had his eyes on the men opposite him.
    "Ho-ho-ho-o-o-o!" It was the smuggler, Tuek, head thrown back laughing with complete abandon. 
    Nervous smiles appeared around the table. 
    Bewt was grinning.
    The banker had pushed his chair back, was glaring at Paul. 
    Kynes said: "One baits an Atreides at his own risk." 
    "Is it Atreides custom to insult their guests?" the banker demanded.
    Before Paul could answer, Jessica leaned forward, said: "Sir!" And she thought: We must learn this Harkonnen creature's game. Is he here to try for Paul? Does he have help?
    "My son displays a general garment and you claim it's cut to your fit?" Jessica asked. "What a fascinating revelation." She slid a hand down to her leg to the crysknife she had fastened in a calf-sheath.
    The banker turned his glare on Jessica. Eyes shifted away from Paul and she saw him ease himself back from the table, freeing himself for action. He had focused on the code word: garment. "Prepare for violence. "
    Kynes directed a speculative look at Jessica, gave a subtle hand signal to Tuek.
    The smuggler lurched to his feet, lifted his flagon. "I'll give you a toast," he said. "To young Paul Atreides, still a lad by his looks, but a man by his actions." 
    Why do they intrude? Jessica asked herself.
    The banker stared now at Kynes, and Jessica saw terror return to the agent's face.
    People began responding all around the table.
    Where Kynes leads, people follow, Jessica thought. He has told us he sides with Paul. What's the secret of his power? It can't be because he's Judge of the Change. That's temporary. And certainly not because he's a civil servant.
    She removed her hand from the crysknife hilt, lifted her flagon to Kynes, who responded in kind.
    Only Paul and the banker-- (Soo-Soo! What an idiotic nickname! Jessica thought.)--remained empty-handed. The banker's attention stayed fixed on Kynes. Paul stared at his plate.
    I was handling it correctly, Paul thought. Why do they interfere? He glanced covertly at the male guests nearest him. Prepare for violence? From whom? Certainly not from that banker fellow.
    Halleck stirred, spoke as though to no one in particular, directing his words over the heads of the guests across from him: "In our society, people shouldn't be quick to take offense. It's frequently suicidal." He looked at the stillsuit manufacturer's daughter beside him. "Don't you think so, miss?"
    "Oh, yes. Yes. Indeed I do," She said. "There's too much violence. It makes me sick. And lots of times no offense is meant, but people die anyway. It doesn't make sense." 
    "Indeed it doesn't," Halleck said.
    Jessica saw the near perfection of the girl's act, realized: That empty-headed little female is not an empty-headed little female. She saw then the pattern of the threat and understood that Halleck, too, had detected it. They had planned to lure Paul with sex. Jessica relaxed. Her son had probably been the first to see it--his training hadn't overlooked that obvious gambit.
    Kynes spoke to the banker: "Isn't another apology in order?" 
    The banker turned a sickly grin toward Jessica, said: "My Lady, I fear I've overindulged in your wines. You serve potent drink at table, and I'm not accustomed to it."
    Jessica heard the venom beneath his tone, spoke sweetly: "When strangers meet, great allowance should be made for differences of custom and training." 
    "Thank you, my Lady," he said.
    The dark-haired companion of the stillsuit manufacturer leaned toward Jessica, said: "The Duke spoke of our being secure here. I do hope that doesn't mean more fighting."
    She was directed to lead the conversation this way, Jessica thought.
    "Likely this will prove unimportant," Jessica said. "But there's so much detail requiring the Duke's personal attention in these times. As long as enmity continues between Atreides and Harkonnen we cannot be too careful. The Duke has sworn kanly. He will leave no Harkonnen agent alive on Arrakis, of course." She glanced at the Guild Bank agent. "And the Conventions, naturally, support him in this." She shifted her attention to Kynes." Is this not so, Dr. Kynes?" 
    "Indeed it is," Kynes said.
    The stillsuit manufacturer pulled his companion gently back. She looked at him, said: "I do believe I'll eat something now. I'd like some of that bird dish you served earlier."
    Jessica signaled a servant, turned to the banker: "And you, sir, were speaking of birds earlier and of their habits. I find so many interesting things about Arrakis. Tell me, where is the spice found? Do the hunters go deep into the desert?"
    "Oh, no, my Lady," he said. "Very little's known of the deep desert. And almost nothing of the southern regions." 
    "There's a tale that a great Mother Lode of spice is to be found in the southern reaches," Kynes said, "but I suspect it was an imaginative invention made solely for purposes of a song. Some daring spice hunters do, on occasion, penetrate into the edge of the central belt, but that's extremely dangerous--navigation is uncertain, storms are frequent. Casualties increase dramatically the farther you operate from Shield Wall bases. It hasn't been found profitable to venture too far south. Perhaps if we had a weather satellite . . ."
    Bewt looked up, spoke around a mouthful of food: "It's said the Fremen travel there, that they go anywhere and have hunted out soaks and sip-wells even in the southern latitudes." 
    "Soaks and sip-wells?" Jessica asked.
    Kynes spoke quickly: "Wild rumors, my Lady. These are known on other planets, not on Arrakis. A soak is a place where water seeps to the surface or near enough to the surface to be found by digging according to certain signs. A sip-well is a form of soak where a person draws water through a straw . . . so it is said." 
    There's deception in his words, Jessica thought. 
    Why is he lying? Paul wondered.
    "How very interesting," Jessica said. And she thought. "It is said . . ." What a curious speech mannerism they have here. If they only knew what it reveals about their dependence on superstitions.
    "I've heard you have a saying," Paul said, "that polish comes from the cities, wisdom from the desert." 
    "There are many sayings on Arrakis," Kynes said.
    Before Jessica could frame a new question, a servant bent over her with a note. She opened it, saw the Duke's handwriting and code signs, scanned it.
    "You'll all be delighted to know," she said, "that our Duke sends his reassurances. The matter which called him away has been settled. The missing carryall has been found. A Harkonnen agent in the crew overpowered the others and flew the machine to a smugglers' base, hoping to sell it there. Both man and machine were turned over to our forces." She nodded to Tuek. 
    The smuggler nodded back.
    Jessica refolded the note, tucked it into her sleeve.
    "I'm glad it didn't come to open battle," the banker said. "The people have such hopes the Atreides will bring peace and prosperity." 
    "Especially prosperity," Bewt said.
    "Shall we have our dessert now?" Jessica asked. "I've had our chef prepare a Caladan sweet: pongi rice in sauce dolsa." 
    "It sounds wonderful," the stillsuit manufacturer said. "Would it be possible to get the recipe?"
    "Any recipe you desire," Jessica said, registering the man for later mention to Hawat. The stillsuit manufacturer was a fearful little climber and could be bought.
    Small talk resumed around her: "Such a lovely fabric . . ." "He is having a setting made to match the jewel . . ." "We might try for a production increase next quarter . . ."
    Jessica stared down at her plate, thinking of the coded part of Leto's message: "The Harkonnens tried to get in a shipment of lasguns. We captured them. This may mean they've succeeded with other shipments. It certainly means they don't place much store in shields. Take appropriate precautions."
    Jessica focused her mind on lasguns, wondering. The white-hot beams of disruptive light could cut through any known substance, provided that substance was not shielded. The fact that feedback from a shield would explode both lasgun and shield did not bother the Harkonnens. Why? A lasgun-shield explosion was a dangerous variable, could be more powerful than atomics, could kill only the gunner and his shielded target.
    The unknowns here filled her with uneasiness.
    Paul said: "I never doubted we'd find the carryall. Once my father moves to solve a problem, he solves it. This is a fact the Harkonnens are beginning to discover."
    He's boasting, Jessica thought. He shouldn't boast. No person who'll be sleeping far below ground level this night as a precaution against lasguns has the right to boast.

= = = = = =

"There is no escape--we pay for the violence of our ancestors. "
-from "The Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Jessica heard the disturbance in the great hall, turned on the light beside her bed. The clock there had not been properly adjusted to local time, and she had to subtract twenty-one minutes to determine that it was about 2 A.M. 
    The disturbance was loud and incoherent. 
    Is this the Harkonnen attack? she wondered.
    She slipped out of bed, checked the screen monitors to see where her family was. The screen showed Paul asleep in the deep cellar room they'd hastily converted to a bedroom for him. The noise obviously wasn't penetrating to his quarters. There was no one in the Duke's room, his bed was unrumpled. Was he still at the field C.P.?
    There were no screens yet to the front of the house. 
    Jessica stood in the middle of her room, listening.
    There was one shouting, incoherent voice. She heard someone call for Dr. Yueh. Jessica found a robe, pulled it over her shoulders, pushed her feet into slippers, strapped the crysknife to her leg. 
    Again, a voice called out for Yueh.
    Jessica belted the robe around her, stepped into the hallway. Then the thought struck her: What if Leto's hurt?
    The hall seemed to stretch out forever under her running feet. She turned through the arch at the end, dashed past the dining hall and down the passage to the Great Hall, finding the place brightly lighted, all the wall suspensors glowing at maximum.
    To her right near the front entry, she saw two house guards holding Duncan Idaho between them. His head lolled forward, and there was an abrupt, panting silence to the scene.
    One of the house guards spoke accusingly to Idaho: "You see what you did? You woke the Lady Jessica."
    The great draperies billowed behind the men, showing that the front door remained open. There was no sign of the Duke or Yueh. Mapes stood to one side staring coldly at Idaho. She wore a long brown robe with serpentine design at the hem. Her feet were pushed into unlaced desert boots.
    "So I woke the Lady Jessica," Idaho muttered. He lifted his face toward the ceiling, bellowed: "My sword was firs' blooded on Grumman!" 
    Great Mother! He's drunk! Jessica thought.
    Idaho's dark, round face was drawn into a frown. His hair, curling like the fur of a black goat, was plastered with dirt. A jagged rent in his tunic exposed an expanse of the dress shirt he had worn at the dinner party earlier. 
    Jessica crossed to him.
    One of the guards nodded to her without releasing his hold on Idaho. "We didn't know what to do with him, my Lady. He was creating a disturbance out front, refusing to come inside. We were afraid locals might come along and see him. That wouldn't do at all. Give us a bad name here." 
    "Where has he been?" Jessica asked.
    "He escorted one of the young ladies home from the dinner, my Lady. Hawat's orders." 
    "Which young lady?"
    "One of the escort wenches. You understand, my Lady?" He glanced at Mapes, lowered his voice. "They're always calling on Idaho for special surveillance of the ladies." 
    And Jessica thought: So they are. But why is he drunk?
    She frowned, turned to Mapes. "Mapes, bring a stimulant. I'd suggest caffeine. Perhaps there's some of the spice coffee left." 
    Mapes shrugged, headed for the kitchen. Her unlaced desert boots slap-slapped against the stone floor.
    Idaho swung his unsteady head around to peer at an angle toward Jessica. "Killed more'n three hunner' men f'r the Duke," he muttered. "Whadduh wanna know is why'm mere? Can't live unner th' groun' here. Can't live onna groun' here. Wha' kinna place is 'iss, huh?"
    A sound from the side hall entry caught Jessica's attention. She turned, saw Yueh crossing to them, his medical kit swinging in his left hand. He was fully dressed, looked pale, exhausted. The diamond tattoo stood out sharply on his forehead.
    "Th' good docker!" Idaho shouted. "Whad're you, Doc? Splint 'n' pill man?" He turned blearily toward Jessica. "Makin' uh damn fool uh m'self, huh?"
    Jessica frowned, remained silent, wondering: Why would Idaho get drunk? Was he drugged?
    "Too much spice beer," Idaho said, attempting to straighten.
    Mapes returned with a steaming cup in her hands, stopped uncertainly behind Yueh. She looked at Jessica, who shook her head.
    Yueh put his kit on the floor, nodded greeting to Jessica, said: "Spice beer, eh?"
    "Bes' damn stuff ever tas'ed," Idaho said. He tried to pull himself to attention. "My sword was firs' blooded on Grumman! Killed a Harkon . . . Harkon . . . killed 'im f'r th' Duke." 
    Yueh turned, looked at the cup in Mapes' hand. 
    "What is that?" 
    "Caffeine," Jessica said.
    Yueh took the cup, held it toward Idaho. "Drink this, lad." 
    "Don't wan' any more f drink." 
    "Drink it, I say!"
    Idaho's head wobbled toward Yueh, and he stumbled one step ahead, dragging the guards with him. "I'm almighdy fed up with pleasin' th' 'Mperial Universe, Doc. Jus' once, we're gonna do th' thing my way." 
    "After you drink this," Yueh said. "It's just caffeine." 
    " 'Sprolly like all res' uh this place! Damn' sun 'stoo brighd. Nothin' has uh righd color. Ever'thing's wrong or . . . " 
    "Well, it's nighttime now," Yueh said. He spoke reasonably. "Drink this like a good lad. It'll make you feel better." 
    "Don' wanna feel bedder!"
    "We can't argue with him all night," Jessica said. And she thought: This calls for shock treatment.
    "There's no reason for you to stay, my Lady," Yueh said. "I can take care of this."
    Jessica shook her head. She stepped forward, slapped Idaho sharply across the cheek.
    He stumbled back with his guards, glaring at her.
    "This is no way to act in your Duke's home," she said. She snatched the cup from Yueh's hands, spilling part of it, thrust the cup toward Idaho. "Now drink this! That's an order!" 
    Idaho jerked himself upright, scowling down at her. He spoke slowly, with careful and precise enunciation: "I do not take orders from a damn' Harkonnen spy." 
    Yueh stiffened, whirled to face Jessica.
    Her face had gone pale, but she was nodding. It all became clear to her--the broken stems of meaning she had seen in words and actions around her these past few days could now be translated. She found herself in the grip of anger almost too great to contain. It took the most profound of her Bene Gesserit training to quiet her pulse and smooth her breathing. Even then she could feel the blaze flickering.
    They were always calling on Idaho for surveillance of the ladies! 
    She shot a glance at Yueh. The doctor lowered his eyes. 
    "You knew this?" she demanded.
    "I . . . heard rumors, my Lady. But I didn't want to add to your burdens."
    "Hawat!" she snapped. "I want Thufir Hawat brought to me immediately!" 
    "But, my Lady . . . " 
    "Immediately!"
    It has to be Hawat, she thought. Suspicion such as this could come from no other source without being discarded immediately.
    Idaho shook his head, mumbled. "Chuck th' whole damn thing."
    Jessica looked down at the cup in her hand, abruptly dashed its contents across Idaho's face. "Lock him in one of the guest rooms of the east wing," she ordered. "Let him sleep it off." 
    The two guards stared at her unhappily. One ventured: "Perhaps we should take him someplace else, m'Lady. We could . . . " 
    "He's supposed to be here!" Jessica snapped. "He has a job to do here." Her voice dripped bitterness. "He's so good at watching the ladies." 
    The guard swallowed.
    "Do you know where the Duke is?" she demanded. 
    "He's at the command post, my Lady." 
    "Is Hawat with him?" 
    "Hawat's in the city, my Lady."
    "You will bring Hawat to me at once," Jessica said. "I will be in my sitting room when he arrives." 
    "But, my Lady . . . "
    "If necessary, I will call the Duke," she said. "I hope it will not be necessary. I would not want to disturb him with this."
    "Yes, my Lady."
    Jessica thrust the empty cup into Mapes' hands, met the questioning stare of the blue-within-blue eyes. "You may return to bed, Mapes." 
    "You're sure you'll not need me?" 
    Jessica smiled grimly. "I'm sure."
    "Perhaps this could wait until tomorrow," Yueh said. "I could give you a sedative and . . . "
    "You will return to your quarters and leave me to handle this my way," she said. She patted his arm to take the sting out of her command. "This is the only way."
    Abruptly, head high, she turned and stalked off through the house to her rooms. Cold walls . . . passages . . . a familiar door . . . She jerked the door open, strode in, and slammed it behind her. Jessica stood there glaring at the shield-blanked windows of her sitting room. Hawat! Could he be the one the Harkonnens bought? We shall see.
    Jessica crossed to the deep, old-fashioned armchair with an embroidered cover of schlag skin, moved the chair into position to command the door. She was suddenly very conscious of the crysknife in its sheath on her leg. She removed the sheath and strapped it to her arm, tested the drop of it. Once more, she glanced around the room, placing everything precisely in her mind against any emergency: the chaise near the corner, the straight chairs along the wall, the two low tables, her stand-mounted zither beside the door to her bedroom.
    Pale rose light glowed from the suspensor lamps. She dimmed them, sat down in the armchair, patting the upholstery, appreciating the chair's regal heaviness for this occasion.
    Now, let him come, she thought. We shall see what we shall see. And she prepared herself in the Bene Gesserit fashion for the wait, accumulating patience, saving her strength.
    Sooner than she had expected, a rap sounded at the door and Hawat entered at her command.
    She watched him without moving from the chair, seeing the crackling sense of drug-induced energy in his movements, seeing the fatigue beneath. Hawat's rheumy old eyes glittered. His leathery skin appeared faintly yellow in the room's light, and there was a wide, wet stain on the sleeve of his knife arm. 
    She smelled blood there.
    Jessica gestured to one of the straight-backed chairs, said: "Bring that chair and sit facing me."
    Hawat bowed, obeyed. That drunken fool of an Idaho! he thought. He studied Jessica's face, wondering how he could save this situation.
    "It's long past time to clear the air between us," Jessica said. 
    "What troubles my Lady?" He sat down, placed hands on knees.
    "Don't play coy with me!" she snapped. "If Yueh didn't tell you why I summoned you, then one of your spies in my household did. Shall we be at least that honest with each other?" 
    "As you wish, my Lady."
    "First, you will answer me one question," she said. "Are you now a Harkonnen agent?"
    Hawat surged half out of his chair, his face dark with fury, demanding: "You dare insult me so?" 
    "Sit down," she said. "You insulted me so." 
    Slowly, he sank back into the chair.
    And Jessica, reading the signs of this face that she knew so well, allowed herself a deep breath. It isn't Hawat.
    "Now I know you remain loyal to my Duke," she said. "I'm prepared, therefore, to forgive your affront to me." 
    "Is there something to forgive?"
    Jessica scowled, wondering: Shall I play my trump? Shall I tell him of the Duke's daughter I've carried within me these few weeks? No . . . Leto himself doesn't know. This would only complicate his life, divert him in a time when he must concentrate on our survival. There is yet time to use this.
    "A Truthsayer would solve this," she said, "but we have no Truthsayer qualified by the High Board." 
    "As you say. We've no Truthsayer."
    "Is there a traitor among us?" she asked. "I've studied our people with great care. Who could it be? Not Gurney. Certainly not Duncan. Their lieutenants are not strategically enough placed to consider. It's not you, Thufir. It cannot be Paul. I know it's not me. Dr. Yueh, then? Shall I call him in and put him to the test?" 
    "You know that's an empty gesture," Hawat said. "He's conditioned by the High College. That I know for certain." 
    "Not to mention that his wife was a Bene Gesserit slain by the Harkonnens," Jessica said.
    "So that's what happened to her," Hawat said.
    "Haven't you heard the hate in his voice when he speaks the Harkonnen name?" 
    "You know I don't have the ear," Hawat said. 
    "What brought this base suspicion on me?" she asked.
    Hawat frowned. "My Lady puts her servant in an impossible position. My first loyalty is to the Duke."
    "I'm prepared to forgive much because of that loyalty," she said.
    "And again I must ask: Is there something to forgive?" 
    "Stalemate?" she asked. 
    He shrugged.
    "Let us discuss something else for a minute, then," she said. "Duncan Idaho, the admirable fighting man whose abilities at guarding and surveillance are so esteemed. Tonight, he overindulged in something called spice beer. I hear reports that others among our people have been stupefied by this concoction. Is that true?" 
    "You have your reports, my Lady." 
    "So I do. Don't you see this drinking as a symptom, Thufir?" 
    "My Lady speaks riddles."
    "Apply your Mentat abilities to it!" she snapped. "What's the problem with Duncan and the others? I can tell you in four words--they have no home." 
    He jabbed a finger at the floor. "Arrakis, that's their home." 
    "Arrakis is an unknown! Caladan was their home, but we've uprooted them. They have no home. And they fear the Duke's failing them."
    He stiffened. "Such talk from one of the men would be cause for--"
    "Oh, stop that, Thufir. Is it defeatist or treacherous for a doctor to diagnose a disease correctly? My only intention is to cure the disease." 
    "The Duke gives me charge over such matters." 
    "But you understand I have a certain natural concern over the progress of this disease," she said. "And perhaps you'll grant I have certain abilities along these lines."
    Will I have to shock him severely? she wondered. He needs shaking up--something to break him from routine.
    "There could be many interpretations for your concern," Hawat said. He shrugged.
    "Then you've already convicted me?"
    "Of course not, my Lady. But I cannot afford to take any chances, the situation being what it is."
    "A threat to my son got past you right here in this house," she said. "Who took that chance?" 
    His face darkened. "I offered my resignation to the Duke." 
    "Did you offer your resignation to me . . . or to Paul?" 
    Now he was openly angry, betraying it in quickness of breathing, in dilation of nostrils, a steady stare. She saw a pulse beating at his temple.
    "I'm the Duke's man," he said, biting off the words.
    "There is no traitor," she said. "The threat's something else. Perhaps it has to do with the lasguns. Perhaps they'll risk secreting a few lasguns with timing mechanisms aimed at house shields. Perhaps they'll . . . "
    "And who could tell after the blast if the explosion wasn't atomic?" he asked. "No, my Lady. They'll not risk anything that illegal. Radiation lingers. The evidence is hard to erase. No. They'll observe most of the forms. It has to be a traitor." 
    "You're the Duke's man," she sneered. "Would you destroy him in the effort to save him?"
    He took a deep breath, then: "If you're innocent, you'll have my most abject apologies."
    "Look at you now, Thufir," she said. "Humans live best when each has his own place, when each knows where he belongs in the scheme of things. Destroy the place and destroy the person. You and I, Thufir, of all those who love the Duke, are most ideally situated to destroy the other's place. Could I not whisper suspicions about you into the Duke's ear at night? When would he be most susceptible to such whispering, Thufir? Must I draw it for you more clearly?" 
    "You threaten me?" he growled.
    "Indeed not. I merely point out to you that someone is attacking us through the basic arrangement of our lives. It's clever, diabolical. I propose to negate this attack by so ordering our lives that there'll be no chinks for such barbs to enter." 
    "You accuse me of whispering baseless suspicions?" 
    "Baseless, yes." 
    "You'd meet this with your own whispers?" 
    "Your life is compounded of whispers, not mine, Thufir." 
    "Then you question my abilities?"
    She sighed. "Thufir, I want you to examine your own emotional involvement in this. The natural human's an animal without logic. Your projections of logic onto all affairs is unnatural, but suffered to continue for its usefulness. You're the embodiment of logic--a Mentat. Yet, your problem solutions are concepts that, in a very real sense, are projected outside yourself, there to be studied and rolled around, examined from all sides."
    "You think now to teach me my trade?" he asked, and he did not try to hide the disdain in his voice.
    "Anything outside yourself, this you can see and apply your logic to it," she said. "But it's a human trait that when we encounter personal problems, those things most deeply personal are the most difficult to bring out for our logic to scan. We tend to flounder around, blaming everything but the actual, deep-seated thing that's really chewing on us."
    "You're deliberately attempting to undermine my faith in my abilities as a Mentat," he rasped. "Were I to find one of our people attempting thus to sabotage any other weapon in our arsenal, I should not hesitate to denounce and destroy him." 
    "The finest Mentats have a healthy respect for the error factor in their computations," she said. 
    "I've never said otherwise!"
    "Then apply yourself to these symptoms we've both seen: drunkenness among the men, quarrels--they gossip and exchange wild rumors about Arrakis; they ignore the most simple--" 
    "Idleness, no more," he said. "Don't try to divert my attention by trying to make a simple matter appear mysterious." 
    She stared at him, thinking of the Duke's men rubbing their woes together in the barracks until you could almost smell the charge there, like burnt insulation. They're becoming like the men of the pre-Guild legend, she thought: Like the men of the lost star-searcher, Ampoliros--sick at their guns--forever seeking, forever prepared and forever unready.
    "Why have you never made full use of my abilities in your service to the Duke?" she asked. "Do you fear a rival for your position?"
    He glared at her, the old eyes blazing. "I know some of the training they give you Bene Gesserit . . . " He broke off, scowling.
    "Go ahead, say it," she said. "Bene Gesserit witches." 
    "I know something of the real training they give you," he said. "I've seen it come out in Paul. I'm not fooled by what your schools tell the public: you exist only to serve."
    The shock must be severe and he's almost ready for it, she thought.
    "You listen respectfully to me in Council," she said, "yet you seldom heed my advice. Why?"
    "I don't trust your Bene Gesserit motives," he said. "You may think you can look through a man; you may think you can make a man do exactly what you--" 
    "You poor fool, Thufir!" she raged. 
    He scowled, pushing himself back in the chair.
    "Whatever rumors you've heard about our schools," she said, "the truth is far greater. If I wished to destroy the Duke . . . or you, or any other person within my reach, you could not stop me." 
    And she thought: Why do I let pride drive such words out of me? This is not the way I was trained. This is not how I must shock him.
    Hawat slipped a hand beneath his tunic where he kept a tiny projector of poison darts. She wears no shield, he thought. Is this just a brag she makes? I could slay her now . . . but, ah-h-h-h, the consequences if I'm wrong.
    Jessica saw the gesture toward his pocket, said: "Let us pray violence shall never be necessary between us." 
    "A worthy prayer," he agreed.
    "Meanwhile, the sickness spreads among us," she said. "I must ask you again: Isn't it more reasonable to suppose the Harkonnens have planted this suspicion to pit the two of us against each other?" 
    "We appear to've returned to stalemate," he said. 
    She sighed, thinking: He's almost ready for it.
    "The Duke and I are father and mother surrogates to our people," she said. "The position--" 
    "He hasn't married you," Hawat said.
    She forced herself to calmness, thinking: A good riposte, that.
    "But he'll not marry anyone else," she said. "Not as long as I live. And we are surrogates, as I've said. To break up this natural order in our affairs, to disturb, disrupt, and confuse us--which target offers itself most enticingly to the Harkonnens?"
    He sensed the direction she was taking, and his brows drew down in a lowering scowl.
    "The Duke?" she asked. "Attractive target, yes, but no one with the possible exception of Paul is better guarded. Me? I tempt them, surely, but they must know the Bene Gesserit make difficult targets. And there's a better target, one whose duties create, necessarily, a monstrous blind spot. One to whom suspicion is as natural as breathing. One who builds his entire life on innuendo and mystery." She darted her right hand toward him. "You!" 
    Hawat started to leap from his chair. 
    "I have not dismissed you, Thufir!" she flared.
    The old Mentat almost fell back into the chair, so quickly did his muscles betray him.
    She smiled without mirth.
    "Now you know something of the real training they give us," she said.
    Hawat tried to swallow in a dry throat. Her command had been regal, preemptory--uttered in a tone and manner he had found completely irresistible. His body had obeyed her before he could think about it. Nothing could have prevented his response--not logic, not passionate anger . . . nothing. To do what she had done spoke of a sensitive, intimate knowledge of the person thus commanded, a depth of control he had not dreamed possible.
    "I have said to you before that we should understand each other," she said. "I meant you should understand me. I already understand you. And I tell you now that your loyalty to the Duke is all that guarantees your safety with me." 
    He stared at her, wet his lips with his tongue.
    "If I desired a puppet, the Duke would marry me," she said. "He might even think he did it of his own free will." 
    Hawat lowered his head, looked upward through his sparse lashes. Only the most rigid control kept him from calling the guard. Control . . . and the suspicion now that woman might not permit it. His skin crawled with the memory of how she had controlled him. In the moment of hesitation, she could have drawn a weapon and killed him!
    Does every human have this blind spot? he wondered. Can any of us be ordered into action before he can resist? The idea staggered him. Who could stop a person with such power?
    "You've glimpsed the fist within the Bene Gesserit glove," she said. "Few glimpse it and live. And what I did was a relatively simple thing for us. You've not seen my entire arsenal. Think on that," 
    "Why aren't you out destroying the Duke's enemies?" he asked.
    "What would you have me destroy?" she asked. "Would you have me make a weakling of our Duke, have him forever leaning on me?" 
    "But, with such power . . . "
    "Power's a two-edged sword, Thufir," she said; "You think: 'How easy for her to shape a human tool to thrust into an enemy's vitals.' True, Thufir; even into your vitals. Yet, what would I accomplish? If enough of us Bene Gesserit did this, wouldn't it make all Bene Gesserit suspect? We don't want that, Thufir. We do not wish to destroy ourselves." She nodded. "We truly exist only to serve." 
    "I cannot answer you," he said. "You know I cannot answer." 
    "You'll say nothing about what has happened here to anyone," she said. "I know you, Thufir."
    "My Lady . . . " Again the old man tried to swallow in a dry throat.
    And he thought: She has great powers, yes. But would these not make her an even more formidable tool for the Harkonnens?
    "The Duke could be destroyed as quickly by his friends as by his enemies," she said. "I trust now you'll get to the bottom of this suspicion and remove it." 
    "If it proves baseless," he said. 
    "If," she sneered. 
    "If," he said.
    "You are tenacious," she said.
    "Cautious," he said, "and aware of the error factor." 
    "Then I'll pose another question for you: What does it mean to you that you stand before another human, that you are bound and helpless and the other human holds a knife at your throat--yet this other human refrains from killing you, frees you from your bonds and gives you the knife to use as you will?"
    She lifted herself out of the chair, turned her back on him. "You may go now, Thufir."
    The old Mentat arose, hesitated, hand creeping toward the deadly weapon beneath his tunic. He was reminded of the bull ring and of the Duke's father (who'd been brave, no matter what his other failings) and one day of the corrida long ago: The fierce black beast had stood there, head bowed, immobilized and confused. The Old Duke had turned his back on the horns, cape thrown flamboyantly over one arm, while cheers rained down from the stands.
    I am the bull and she the matador, Hawat thought. He withdrew his hand from the weapon, glanced at the sweat glistening in his empty palm.
    And he knew that whatever the facts proved to be in the end, he would never forget this moment nor lose this sense of supreme admiration for the Lady Jessica. 
    Quietly, he turned and left the room.
    Jessica lowered her gaze from the reflection in the windows, turned, and stared at the closed door.
    "Now we'll see some proper action," she whispered.

= = = = = =

Do you wrestle with dreams? 
Do you contend with shadows? 
Do you move in a kind of sleep? 
Time has slipped away. 
Your life is stolen. 
You tarried with trifles, 
Victim of your folly.
-Dirge for Jamis on the Funeral Plain, from "Songs of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Leto stood in the foyer of his house, studying a note by the light of a single suspensor lamp. Dawn was yet a few hours away, and he felt his tiredness. A Fremen messenger had brought the note to the outer guard just now as the Duke arrived from his command post.
    The note read: "A column of smoke by day, a pillar of fire by night." 
    There was no signature.
    What does it mean? he wondered.
    The messenger had gone without waiting for an answer and before he could be questioned. He had slipped into the night like some smoky shadow.
    Leto pushed the paper into a tunic pocket, thinking to show it to Hawat later. He brushed a lock of hair from his forehead, took a sighing breath. The anti-fatigue pills were beginning to wear thin. It had been a long two days since the dinner party and longer than that since he had slept.
    On top of all the military problems, there'd been the disquieting session with Hawat, the report on his meeting with Jessica.
    Should I waken Jessica? he wondered. There's no reason to play the secrecy game with her any longer. Or is there? 
    Blast and damn that Duncan Idaho!
    He shook his head. No, not Duncan. I was wrong not to take Jessica into my confidence from the first. I must do it now, before more damage is done.
    The decision made him feel better, and he hurried from the foyer through the Great Hall and down the passages toward the family wing.
    At the turn where the passages split to the service area, he paused. A strange mewling came from somewhere down the service passage. Leto put his left hand to the switch on his shield belt, slipped his kindjal into his right hand. The knife conveyed a sense of reassurance. That strange sound had sent a chill through him.
    Softly, the Duke moved down the service passage, cursing the inadequate illumination. The smallest of suspensors had been spaced about eight meters apart along here and tuned to their dimmest level. The dark stone walls swallowed the light.
    A dull blob stretching across the floor appeared out of the gloom ahead.
    Leto hesitated, almost activated his shield, but refrained because that would limit his movements, his hearing . . . and because the captured shipment of lasguns had left him filled with doubts.
    Silently, he moved toward the grey blob, saw that it was a human figure, a man face down on the stone. Leto turned him over with a foot, knife poised, bent close in the dim light to see the face. It was the smuggler, Tuek, a wet stain down his chest. The dead eyes stared with empty darkness. Leto touched the stain--warm.
    How could this man be dead here? Leto asked himself. Who killed him?
    The mewling sound was louder here. It came from ahead and down the side passage to the central room where they had installed the main shield generator for the house.
    Hand on belt switch, kindjal poised, the Duke skirted the body, slipped down the passage and peered around the corner toward the shield generator room.
    Another grey blob lay stretched on the floor a few paces away, and he saw at once this was the source of the noise. The shape crawled toward him with painful slowness, gasping, mumbling.
    Leto stilled his sudden constriction of fear, darted down the passage, crouched beside the crawling figure. It was Mapes, the Fremen housekeeper, her hair tumbled around her face, clothing disarrayed. A dull shininess of dark stain spread from her back along her side. He touched her shoulder and she lifted herself on her elbows, head tipped up to peer at him, the eyes black-shadowed emptiness.
    "S'you," she gasped. "Killed . . . guard . . . sent . . . get . . . Tuek . . . escape . . . m'Lady . . . you . . . you . . . here . . . no . . . " She flopped forward, her head thumping against the stone.
    Leto felt for pulse at the temples. There was none. He looked at the stain: she'd been stabbed in the back. Who? His mind raced. Did she mean someone had killed a guard? And Tuek--had Jessica sent for him? Why?
    He started to stand up. A sixth sense warned him. He flashed a hand toward the shield switch--too late. A numbing shock slammed his arm aside. He felt pain there, saw a dart protruding from the sleeve, sensed paralysis spreading from it up his arm. It took an agonizing effort to lift his head and look down the passage.
    Yueh stood in the open door of the generator room. His face reflected yellow from the light of a single, brighter suspensor above the door. There was stillness from the room behind him--no sound of generators.
    Yueh! Leto thought. He's sabotaged the house generators! We 're wide open!
    Yueh began walking toward him, pocketing a dartgun.
    Leto found he could still speak, gasped: "Yueh! How?" Then the paralysis reached his legs and he slid to the floor with his back propped against the stone wall.
    Yueh's face carried a look of sadness as he bent over, touched Leto's forehead. The Duke found he could feel the touch, but it was remote . . . dull.
    "The drug on the dart is selective," Yueh said "You can speak, but I'd advise against it." He glanced down the hall, and again bent over Leto, pulled out the dart, tossed it aside. The sound of the dart clattering on the stones was faint and distant to the Duke's ears. 
    It can't be Yueh, Leto thought. He's conditioned. 
    "How?" Leto whispered.
    "I'm sorry, my dear Duke, but there are things which will make greater demands than this." He touched the diamond tattoo on his forehead. "I find it very strange, myself--an override on my pyretic conscience--but I wish to kill a man. Yes, I actually wish it. I will stop at nothing to do it."
    He looked down at the Duke. "Oh, not you, my dear Duke. The Baron Harkonnen. I wish to kill the Baron." 
    "Bar . . . on Har . . . "
    "Be quiet, please, my poor Duke. You haven't much time. That peg tooth I put in your mouth after the tumble at Narcal--that tooth must be replaced, in a moment, I'll render you unconscious and replace that tooth." He opened his hand, stared at something in it. "An exact duplicate, its core shaped most exquisitely like a nerve. It'll escape the usual detectors, even a fast scanning. But if you bite down hard on it, the cover crushes. Then, when you expel your breath sharply, you fill the air around you with a poison gas--most deadly."
    Leto stared up at Yueh, seeing madness in the man's eyes, the perspiration along brown and chin.
    "You were dead anyway, my poor Duke," Yueh said. "But you will get close to the Baron before you die. He'll believe you're stupefied by drugs beyond any dying effort to attack him. And you will be drugged--and tied. But attack can take strange forms. And you will remember the tooth. The tooth, Duke Leto Atreides. You will remember the tooth."
    The old doctor leaned closer and closer until his face and drooping mustache dominated Leto's narrowing vision. 
    "The tooth," Yueh muttered. 
    "Why?" Leto whispered.
    Yueh lowered himself to one knee beside the Duke. "I made a shaitan's bargain with the Baron. And I must be certain he has fulfilled his half of it. When I see him, I'll know. When I look at the Baron, then I will know. But I'll never enter his presence without the price. You're the price, my poor Duke. And I'll know when I see him. My poor Wanna taught me many things, and one is to see certainty of truth when the stress is great. I cannot do it always, but when I see the Baron--then, I will know."
    Leto tried to look down at the tooth in Yueh's hand. He felt this was happening in a nightmare--it could not be.
    Yueh's purple lips turned up in a grimace. "I'll not get close enough to the Baron, or I'd do this myself. No. I'll be detained at a safe distance. But you . . . ah, now! You, my lovely weapon! He'll want you close to him--to gloat over you, to boast a little." 
    Leto found himself almost hypnotized by a muscle on the left side of Yueh's jaw. The muscle twisted when the man spoke.
    Yueh leaned closer. "And you, my good Duke, my precious Duke, you must remember this tooth." He held it up between thumb and forefinger. "It will be all that remains to you." 
    Leto's mouth moved without sound, then: "Refuse." 
    "Ah-h, no! You mustn't refuse. Because, in return for this small service. I'm doing a thing for you. I will save your son and your woman. No other can do it. They can be removed to a place where no Harkonnen can reach them." 
    "How . . . save . . . them?" Leto whispered.
    "By making it appear they're dead, by secreting them among people who draw knife at hearing the Harkonnen name, who hate the Harkonnens so much they'll burn a chair in which a Harkonnen has sat, salt the ground over which a Harkonnen has walked." He touched Leto's jaw. "Can you feel anything in your jaw?" 
    The Duke found that he could not answer. He sensed distant tugging, saw Yueh's hand come up with the ducal signet ring.
    "For Paul," Yueh said. "You'll be unconscious presently. Good-by, my poor Duke. When next we meet we'll have no time for conversation."
    Cool remoteness spread upward from Leto's jaw, across his cheeks. The shadowy, hall narrowed to a pinpoint with Yueh's purple lips centered in it.
    "Remember the tooth!" Yueh hissed. "The tooth!"

= = = = = =

There should be a science of discontent. People need hard times and oppression to develop psychic muscles.
-from "Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Jessica awoke in the dark, feeling premonition in the stillness around her. She could not understand why her mind and body felt so sluggish. Skin raspings of fear ran along her nerves. She thought of sitting up and turning on a light, but something stayed the decision. Her mouth felt . . . strange. 
    Lump-lump-lump-lump!
    It was a dull sound, directionless in the dark. Somewhere.
    The waiting moment was packed with time, with rustling needle-stick movements.
    She began to feel her body, grew aware of bindings on wrists and ankles, a gag in her mouth. She was on her side, hands tied behind her. She tested the bindings, realized they were krimskell fiber, would only claw tighter as she pulled. 
    And now, she remembered.
    There had been movement in the darkness of her bedroom, something wet and pungent slapped against her face, filling her mouth, hands grasping for her. She had gasped--one indrawn breath--sensing the narcotic in the wetness. Consciousness had receded, sinking her into a black bin of terror.
    It has come, she thought. How simple it was to subdue the Bene Gesserit. All it took was treachery. Hawat was right. 
    She forced herself not to pull on her bindings.
    This is not my bedroom, she thought. They've taken me someplace else.
    Slowly, she marshaled the inner calmness.
    She grew aware of the smell of her own stale sweat with its chemical infusion of fear.
    Where is Paul? she asked herself. My son--what have they done to him?
    Calmness.
    She forced herself to it, using the ancient routines. 
    But terror remained so near. 
    Leto? Where are you, Leto?
    She sensed a diminishing in the dark. It began with shadows. Dimensions separated, became new thorns of awareness. White. A line under a door. 
    I'm on the floor.
    People walking. She sensed it through the floor.
    Jessica squeezed back the memory of terror. I must remain calm, alert, and prepared. I may get only one chance. Again, she forced the inner calmness.
    The ungainly thumping of her heartbeats evened, shaping out time. She counted back. I was unconscious about an hour. She closed her eyes, focused her awareness onto the approaching footsteps.
    Four people.
    She counted the differences in their steps.
    I must pretend I'm still unconscious. She relaxed against the cold floor, testing her body's readiness, heard a door open, sensed increased light through her eyelids.
    Feet approached: someone standing over her.
    "You are awake," rumbled a basso voice. "Do not pretend." 
    She opened her eyes.
    The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen stood over her. Around them, she recognized the cellar room where Paul had slept, saw his cot at one side--empty. Suspensor lamps were brought in by guards, distributed near the open door. There was a glare of light in the hallway beyond that hurt her eyes.
    She looked up at the Baron. He wore a yellow cape that bulged over his portable suspensors. The fat cheeks were two cherubic mounds beneath spider-black eyes.
    "The drug was timed," he rumbled. "We knew to the minute when you'd be coming out of it."
    How could that be? she wondered. They 'd have to know my exact weight, my metabolism, my . . . Yueh!
    "Such a pity you must remain gagged," the Baron said. "We could have such an interesting conversation." 
    Yueh's the only one it could be, she thought. How? 
    The Baron glanced behind him at the door. "Come in, Piter."
    She had never before seen the man who entered to stand beside the Baron, but the face was known--and the man: Piter de Vries, the Mentat-Assassin. She studied him--hawk features, blue-ink eyes that suggested he was a native of Arrakis, but subtleties of movement and stance told her he was not. And his flesh was too well firmed with water. He was tall, though slender, and something about him suggested effeminacy.
    "Such a pity we cannot have our conversation, my dear Lady Jessica." the Baron said. "However, I'm aware of your abilities." He glanced at the Mentat. "Isn't that true, Piter?" 
    "As you say, Baron," the man said.
    The voice was tenor. It touched her spine with a wash of coldness. She had never heard such a chill voice. To one with the Bene Gesserit training, the voice screamed: Killer!
    "I have a surprise for Piter," the Baron said. "He thinks he has come here to collect his reward--you, Lady Jessica. But I wish to demonstrate a thing: that he does not really want you." 
    "You play with me, Baron?" Piter asked, and he smiled.
    Seeing that smile, Jessica wondered that the Baron did not leap to defend himself from this Piter. Then she corrected herself. The Baron could not read that smile. He did not have the Training.
    "In many ways, Piter is quite naive," the Baron said. "He doesn't admit to himself what a deadly creature you are, Lady Jessica. I'd show him, but it'd be a foolish risk." The Baron smiled at Piter, whose face had become a waiting mask. "I know what Piter really wants. Piter wants power."
    "You promised I could have her," Piter said. The tenor voice had lost some of its cold reserve.
    Jessica heard the clue-tones in the man's voice, allowed herself an inward shudder. How could the Baron have made such an animal out of a Mentat?
    "I give you a choice, Piter," the Baron said. 
    "What choice?"
    The Baron snapped fat fingers. "This woman and exile from the Imperium, or the Duchy of Atreides on Arrakis to rule as you see fit in my name." 
    Jessica watched the Baron's spider eyes study Piter. 
    "You could be Duke here in all but name," the Baron said.
    Is my Leto dead, then? Jessica asked herself. She felt a silent wail begin somewhere in her mind.
    The Baron kept his attention on the Mentat. "Understand yourself, Piter. You want her because she was a Duke's woman, a symbol of his power--beautiful, useful, exquisitely trained for her role. But an entire duchy, Piter! That's more than a symbol; that's the reality. With it you could have many women . . . and more." 
    "You do not joke with Piter?"
    The Baron turned with that dancing lightness the suspensors gave him. "Joke? I? Remember--I am giving up the boy. You heard what the traitor said about the lad's training. They are alike, this mother and son--deadly." The Baron smiled. "I must go now. I will send in the guard I've reserved for this moment. He's stone deaf. His orders will be to convey you on the first leg of your journey into exile. He will subdue this woman if he sees her gain control of you. He'll not permit you to untie her gag until you're off Arrakis. If you choose not to leave . . . he has other orders." 
    "You don't have to leave," Piter said. "I've chosen." 
    "Ah, hah!" the Baron chortled. "Such quick decision can mean only one thing." 
    "I will take the duchy," Piter said.
    And Jessica thought: Doesn't Piter know the Baron's lying to him? But--how could he know? He's a twisted Mentat.
    The Baron glanced down at Jessica. "Is it not wonderful that I know Piter so well? I wagered with my Master at Arms that this would be Piter's choice. Hah! Well, I leave now. This is much better. Ah-h, much better. You understand, Lady Jessica? I hold no rancor toward you. It's a necessity. Much better this way. Yes. And I've not actually ordered you destroyed. When it's asked of me what happened to you, I can shrug it off in all truth." 
    "You leave it to me then?" Piter asked.
    "The guard I send you will take your orders," the Baron said. "Whatever's done I leave to you." He stared at Piter. "Yes. There will be no blood on my hands here. It's your decision. Yes. I know nothing of it. You will wait until I've gone before doing whatever you must do. Yes. Well . . . ah, yes. Yes. Good." 
    He fears the questioning of a Truthsayer, Jessica thought. Who? Ah-h-h, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen, of course! If he knows he must face her questions, then the Emperor is in on this for sure. Ah-h-h-h, my poor Leto.
    With one last glance at Jessica, the Baron turned, went out the door. She followed him with her eyes, thinking: It's as the Reverend Mother warned--too potent an adversary.
    Two Harkonnen troopers entered. Another, his face a scarred mask, followed and stood in the doorway with drawn lasgun.
    The deaf one, Jessica thought, studying the scarred face. The Baron knows I could use the Voice on any other man.
    Scarface looked at Piter. "We've the boy on a litter outside. What are your orders?"
    Piter spoke to Jessica. "I'd thought of binding you by a threat held over your son, but I begin to see that would not have worked, I let emotion cloud reason. Bad policy for a Mentat." He looked at the first pair of troopers, turning so the deaf one could read his lips: "Take them into the desert as the traitor suggested for the boy. His plan is a good one. The worms will destroy all evidence. Their bodies must never be found." 
    "You don't wish to dispatch them yourself?" Scarface asked. 
    He reads lips, Jessica thought.
    "I follow my Baron's example," Piter said. "Take them where the traitor said."
    Jessica heard the harsh Mentat control in Piter's voice, thought: He, too, fears the Truthsayer.
    Piter shrugged, turned, and went through the doorway. He hesitated there, and Jessica thought he might turn back for a last look at her, but he went out without turning.
    "Me, I wouldn't like the thought of facing that Truthsayer after this night's work," Scarface said.
    "You ain't likely ever to run into that old witch," one of the other troopers said. He went around to Jessica's head, bent over her. "It ain't getting our work done standing around here chattering. Take her feet and--" 
    "Why'n't we kill 'em here?" Scarface asked.
    "Too messy," the first one said. "Unless you wants to strangle'em. Me, I likes a nice straightforward job. Drop 'em on the desert like that traitor said, cut 'em once or twice, leave 'the evidence for the worms. Nothing to clean up afterwards." 
    "Yeah . . . well, I guess you're right," Scarface said.
    Jessica listened to them, watching, registering. But the gag blocked her Voice, and there was the deaf one to consider.
    Scarface holstered his lasgun, took her feet. They lifted her like a sack of grain, maneuvered her through the door and dumped her onto a suspensor-buoyed litter with another bound figure. As they turned her, fitting her to the litter, she saw her companion's face--Paul! He was bound, but not gagged. His face was no more than ten centimeters from hers, eyes closed, his breathing even. 
    Is he drugged? she wondered.
    The troopers lifted the litter, and Paul's eyes opened the smallest fraction--dark slits staring at her.
    He mustn't try the Voice! she prayed. The deaf guard!
    Paul's eyes closed.
    He had been practicing the awareness-breathing, calming his mind, listening to their captors. The deaf one posed a problem, but Paul contained his despair. The mind-calming Bene Gesserit regimen his mother had taught him kept him poised, ready to expand any opportunity.
    Paul allowed himself another slit-eyed inspection of his mother's face. She appeared unharmed. Gagged, though.
    He wondered who could've captured her. His own captivity was plain enough--to bed with a capsule prescribed by Yueh, awaking to find himself bound to this litter. Perhaps a similar thing had befallen her. Logic said the traitor was Yueh, but he held final decision in abeyance. There was no understanding it--a Suk doctor a traitor.
    The litter tipped slightly as the Harkonnen troopers maneuvered it through a doorway into starlit night. A suspensor-buoy rasped against the doorway. Then they were on sand, feet grating in it. A 'thopter wing loomed overhead, blotting the stars. The litter settled to the ground.
    Paul's eyes adjusted to the faint light. He recognized the deaf trooper as the man who opened the 'thopter door, peered inside at the green gloom illuminated by the instrument panel.
    "This the 'thopter we're supposed to use?" he asked, and turned to watch his companion's lips.
    "It's the one the traitor said was fixed for desert work," the other said.
    Scarface nodded. "But it's one of them little liaison jobs. Ain't room in there for more'n them an' two of us."
    "Two's enough," said the litter-bearer, moving up close and presenting his lips for reading. "We can take care of it from here on, Kinet."
    "The Baron he told me to make sure what happened to them two," Scarface said.
    "What you so worried about?" asked another trooper from behind the litter-bearer.
    "She is a Bene Gesserit witch," the deaf one said. "They have powers."
    "Ah-h-h . . . "The litter-bearer made the sign of the fist at his ear. "One of them, eh? Know whatcha mean."
    The trooper behind him grunted. "She'll be worm meat soon enough. Don't suppose even a Bene Gesserit witch has powers over one of them big worms. Eh, Czigo?" He nudged the litter-bearer.
    "Yee-up," the litter-bearer said. He returned to the litter, took Jessica's shoulders. "C'mon, Kinet. You can go along if you wants to make sure what happens." 
    "It is nice of you to invite me, Czigo," Scarface said.
    Jessica felt herself lifted, the wing shadow spinning--stars. She was pushed into the rear of the 'thopter, her krimskell fiber bindings examined, and she was strapped down. Paul was jammed in beside her, strapped securely, and she noted his bonds were simple rope.
    Scarface, the deaf one they called Kinet, took his place in front. The litter-bearer, the one they called Czigo, came around and took the other front seat.
    Kinet closed his door, bent to the controls. The 'thopter took off in a wing-tucked surge, headed south over the Shield Wall. Czigo tapped his companion's shoulder, said: "Whyn't you turn around and keep an eye on them two?" 
    "Sure you know the way to go?" Kinet watched Czigo's lips. 
    "I listened to the traitor same's you."
    Kinet swiveled his seat. Jessica saw the glint of starlight on a lasgun in his hand. The 'thopter's light-walled interior seemed to collect illumination as her eyes adjusted, but the guard's scarred face remained dim. Jessica tested her seat belt, found it loose. She felt roughness in the strap against her left arm, realized the strap had been almost severed, would snap at a sudden jerk.
    Has someone been at this 'thopter, preparing it for us? she wondered. Who? Slowly, she twisted her bound feet clear of Paul's.
    "Sure do seem a shame to waste a good-looking woman like this," Scarface said. "You ever have any highborn types?" He turned to look at the pilot.
    "Bene Gesserit ain't all highborn," the pilot said. 
    "But they all looks heighty."
    He can see me plain enough, Jessica thought. She brought her bound legs up onto the seat, curled into a sinuous ball, staring at Scarface.
    "Real pretty, she is," Kinet said. He wet his lips with his tongue. "Sure do seem a shame." He looked at Czigo.
    "You thinking what I think you're thinking?" the pilot asked.
    "Who'd be to know?" the guard asked. "Afterwards . . . " He shrugged. "I just never had me no highborns. Might never get a chance like this one again."
    "You lay a hand on my mother . . . " Paul grated. He glared at Scarface.
    "Hey!" the pilot laughed. "Cub's got a bark. Ain't got no bite, though."
    And Jessica thought; Paul's pitching his voice too high. It may work, though.
    They flew on in silence.
    These poor fools, Jessica thought, studying her guards and reviewing the Baron's words. They'll be killed as soon as they report success on their mission. The Baron wants no witnesses.
    The 'thopter banked over the southern rim of the Shield Wall, and Jessica saw a moonshadowed expanse of sand beneath them.
    "This oughta be far enough," the pilot said. "The traitor said to put'em on the sand anywhere near the Shield Wall." He dipped the craft toward the dunes in a long, falling stoop, brought it up stiffly over the desert surface.
    Jessica saw Paul begin taking the rhythmic breaths of the calming exercise. He closed his eyes, opened them. Jessica stared, helpless to aid him. He hasn't mastered the Voice yet, she thought, if he fails . . . 
    The 'thopter touched sand with a soft lurch, and Jessica, looking north back across the Shield Wall, saw a shadow of wings settle out of sight up there.
    Someone's following us! she thought. Who? Then: The ones the Baron set to watch this pair. And there'll be watchers for the watchers, too.
    Czigo shut off his wing rotors. Silence flooded in upon them.
    Jessica turned her head. She could see out the window beyond Scarface a dim glow of light from a rising moon, a frosted rim of rock rising from the desert. Sandblast ridges streaked its sides.
    Paul cleared his throat.
    The pilot said: "Now, Kinet?" 
    "I dunno, Czigo."
    Czigo turned, said: "Ah-h-h, look." He reached out for Jessica's skirt.
    "Remove her gag," Paul commanded.
    Jessica felt the words rolling in the air. The tone, the timbre excellent--imperative, very sharp. A slightly lower pitch would have been better, but it could still fall within this man's spectrum.
    Czigo shifted his hand up to the band around Jessica's mouth, slipped the knot on the gag. 
    "Stop that!" Kinet ordered.
    "Ah, shut your trap," Czigo said. "Her hands're tied." He freed the knot and the binding dropped. His eyes glittered as he studied Jessica.
    Kinet put a hand on the pilot's arm. "Look, Czigo, no need to . . . "
    Jessica twisted her neck, spat out the gag. She pitched her voice in low, intimate tones. "Gentlemen! No need to fight over me." At the same time, she writhed sinuously for Kinet's benefit.
    She saw them grow tense, knowing that in this instant they were convinced of the need to fight over her. Their disagreement required no other reason. In their minds, they were fighting over her.
    She held her face high in the instrument glow to be sure Kinet would read her lips, said: "You mustn't disagree." They drew farther apart, glanced warily at each other. "Is any woman worth fighting over?" she asked.
    By uttering the words, by being there, she made herself infinitely worth their fighting.
    Paul clamped his lips tightly closed, forced himself to be silent. There had been the one chance for him to succeed with the Voice. Now--everything depended on his mother whose experience went so far beyond his own.
    "Yeah," Scarface said. "No need to fight over . . . " 
    His hand flashed toward the pilot's neck. The blow was met by a splash of metal that caught the arm and in the same motion slammed into Kinet's chest.
    Scarface groaned, sagged backward against his door.
    "Thought I was some dummy didn't know that trick," Czigo said. He brought back his hand, revealing the knife. It glittered in reflected moonlight.
    "Now for the cub," he said and leaned toward Paul. 
    "No need for that," Jessica murmured. 
    Czigo hesitated.
    "Wouldn't you rather have me cooperative?" Jessica asked. "Give the boy a chance." Her lip curled in a sneer. "Little enough chance he'd have out there in that sand. Give him that and . . . " She smiled. "You could find yourself well rewarded." 
    Czigo glanced left, right, returned his attention to Jessica. "I've heard me what can happen to a man in this desert," he said. "Boy might find the knife a kindness."
    "Is it so much I ask?" Jessica pleaded. 
    "You're trying to trick me," Czigo muttered.
    "I don't want to see my son die," Jessica said. "Is that a trick?" 
    Czigo moved back, elbowed the door latch. He grabbed Paul, dragged him across the seat, pushed him half out the door and held the knife posed. "What'll y' do, cub, if I cut y'r bonds?" 
    "He'll leave here immediately and head for those rocks," Jessica said.
    "Is that what y'll do, cub?" Czigo asked. 
    Paul's voice was properly surly. "Yes."
    The knife moved down, slashed the bindings of his legs. Paul felt the hand on his back to hurl him down onto the sand, feigned a lurch against the doorframe for purchase, turned as though to catch himself, lashed out with his right foot.
    The toe was aimed with a precision that did credit to his long years of training, as though all of that training focused on this instant. Almost every muscle of his body cooperated in the placement of it. The tip struck the soft part of Czigo's abdomen just below the sternum, slammed upward with terrible force over the liver and through the diaphragm to crush the right ventricle of the man's heart.
    With one gurgling scream, the guard jerked backward across the seats. Paul, unable to use his hands, continued his tumble onto the sand, landing with a roll that took up the force and brought him back to his feet in one motion. He dove back into the cabin, found the knife and held it in his teeth while his mother sawed her bonds. She took the blade and freed his hands.
    "I could've handled him," she said. "He'd have had to cut my bindings. That was a foolish risk." 
    "I saw the opening and used it," he said.
    She heard the harsh control in his voice, said: "Yueh's house sign is scrawled on the ceiling of this cabin." 
    He looked up, saw the curling symbol.
    "Get out and let us study this craft," she said. "There's a bundle under the pilot's seat. I felt it when we got in." 
    "Bomb?" 
    "Doubt it. There's something peculiar here."
    Paul leaped out to the sand and Jessica followed. She turned, reached under the seat for the strange bundle, seeing Czigo's feet close to her face, feeling dampness on the bundle as she removed it, realizing the dampness was the pilot's blood.
    Waste of moisture, she thought, knowing that this was Arrakeen thinking.
    Paul stared around them, saw the rock scarp lifting out of the desert like a beach rising from the sea, wind-carved palisades beyond. He turned back as his mother lifted the bundle from the 'thopter, saw her stare across the dunes toward the Shield Wall. He looked to see what drew her attention, saw another 'thopter swooping toward them, realized they'd not have time to clear the bodies out of this 'thopter and escape.
    "Run, Paul!" Jessica shouted. "It's Harkonnens!"

= = = = = =

Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife--chopping off what's incomplete and saying: "Now, it's complete because it's ended here."
-from "Collected Sayings of, Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    A man in Harkonnen uniform skidded to a stop at the end of the hall, stared in at Yueh, taking in at a single glance Mapes' body, the sprawled form of the Duke, Yueh standing there. The man held a lasgun in his right hand. There was a casual air of brutality about him, a sense of toughness and poise that sent a shiver through Yueh.
    Sardaukar, Yueh thought. A Bashar by the look of him. Probably one of the Emperor's own sent here to keep an eye on things. No matter what the uniform, there's no disguising them.
    "You're Yueh," the man said. He looked speculatively at the Suk School ring on the Doctor's hair, stared once at the diamond tattoo and then met Yueh's eyes. 
    "I am Yueh," the Doctor said.
    "You can relax, Yueh," the man said. "When you dropped the house shields we came right in. Everything's under control here. Is this the Duke?" 
    "This is the Duke." 
    "Dead?" 
    "Merely unconscious. I suggest you tie him."
    "Did you do for these others?" He glanced back down the hall where Mapes' body lay.
    "More's the pity," Yueh muttered.
    "Pity!" the Sardaukar sneered. He advanced, looked down at Leto. "So that's the great Red Duke."
    If I had doubts about what this man is, that would end them, Yueh thought. Only the Emperor calls the Atreides the Red Duke.
    The Sardaukar reached down, cut the red hawk insignia from Leto's uniform. "Little souvenir," he said. "Where's the ducal signet ring?" 
    "He doesn't have it on him," Yueh said. 
    "I can see that!" the Sardaukar snapped.
    Yueh stiffened, swallowed, if they press me, bring in a Truthsayer, they'll find out about the ring, about the 'thopter I prepared--all will fail.
    "Sometimes the Duke sent the ring with a messenger as surety that an order came directly from him," Yueh said. 
    "Must be damned trusted messengers," the Sardaukar muttered. 
    "Aren't you going to tie him?" Yueh ventured. 
    "How long'll he be unconscious?"
    "Two hours or so. I wasn't as precise with his dosage as I was for the woman and boy."
    The Sardaukar spurned the Duke with his toe. "This was nothing to fear even when awake. When will the woman and boy awaken?" 
    "About ten minutes." 
    "So soon?"
    "I was told the Baron would arrive immediately behind his men."
    "So he will. You'll wait outside, Yueh." He shot a hard glance at Yueh. "Now!" 
    Yueh glanced at Leto. "What about . . . "
    "He'll be delivered to the Baron all properly trussed like a roast for the oven." Again, the Sardaukar looked at the diamond tattoo on Yueh's forehead. "You're known; you'll be safe enough in the halls. We've no more time for chit-chat, traitor. I hear the others coming."
    Traitor, Yueh thought. He lowered his gaze, pressed past the Sardaukar, knowing this as a foretaste of how history would remember him: Yueh the traitor.
    He passed more bodies on his way to the front entrance and glanced at them, fearful that one might be Paul or Jessica. All were house troopers or wore Harkonnen uniform.
    Harkonnen guards came alert, staring at him as he emerged from the front entrance into flame-lighted night. The palms along the road had been fired to illuminate the house. Black smoke from the flammables used to ignite the trees poured upward through orange flames.
    "It's the traitor," someone said.
    "The Baron will want to see you soon," another said.
    I must get to the 'thopter, Yueh thought. I must put the ducal signet where Paul will find it. And fear struck him: If Idaho suspects me or grows impatient--if he doesn't wait and go exactly where I told him--Jessica and Paul will not be saved from the carnage. I'll be denied even the smallest relief from my act.
    The Harkonnen guard released his arm, said "Wait over there out of the way."
    Abruptly, Yueh saw himself as cast away in this place of destruction, spared nothing, given not the smallest pity. Idaho must not fail!
    Another guard bumped into him, barked: "Stay out of the way, you!"
    Even when they've profited by me they despise me. Yueh thought. He straightened himself as he was pushed aside, regained some of his dignity.
    "Wait for the Baron!" a guard officer snarled.
    Yueh nodded, walked with controlled casualness along the front of the house, turned the corner into shadows out of sight of the burning palms. Quickly, every step betraying his anxiety, Yueh made for the rear yard beneath the conservatory where the 'thopter waited--the craft they had placed there to carry away Paul and his mother.
    A guard stood at the open rear door of the house, his attention focused on the lighted hall and men banging through there, searching from room to room. 
    How confident they were!
    Yueh hugged the shadows, worked his way around the 'thopter, eased open the door on the side away from the guard. He felt under the front seats for the Fremkit he had hidden there, lifted a flap and slipped in the ducal signet. He felt the crinkling of the spice paper there, the note he had written, pressed the ring into the paper. He removed his hand, resealed the pack.
    Softly, Yueh closed the 'thopter door, worked his way back to the corner of the house and around toward the flaming trees. 
    Now, it is done, he thought.
    Once more, he emerged into the light of the blazing palms. He pulled his cloak around him, stared at the flames. Soon I will know. Soon I will see the Baron and I will know. And the Baron--he will encounter a small tooth.

= = = = = =

There is a legend that the instant the Duke Leto Atreides died a meteor streaked across the skies above his ancestral palace on Caladan.
-the Princess Irulan: "Introduction to A Child's History of Muad'Dib"

    The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen stood at a viewport of the grounded lighter he was using as a command post. Out the port he saw the flame-lighted night of Arrakeen. His attention focused on the distant Shield Wall where his secret weapon was doing its work. 
    Explosive artillery.
    The guns nibbled at the caves where the Duke's fighting men had retreated for a last-ditch stand. Slowly measured bites of orange glare, showers of rock and dust in the brief illumination--and the Duke's men were being sealed off to die by starvation, caught like animals in their burrows.
    The Baron could feel the distant chomping--a drumbeat carried to him through the ship's metal: broomp . . . broomp. Then: BROOMP-broomp!
    Who would think of reviving artillery in this day of shields? The thought was a chuckle in his mind. But it was predictable the Duke's men would run for those caves. And the Emperor will appreciate my cleverness in preserving the lives of our mutual force.
    He adjusted one of the little suspensors that guarded his fat body against the pull of gravity. A smile creased his mouth, pulled at the lines of his jowls.
    A pity to waste such fighting men as the Duke's, he thought. He smiled more broadly, laughing at himself. Pity should be cruel! He nodded. Failure was, by definition, expendable. The whole universe sat there, open to the man who could make the right decisions. The uncertain rabbits had to be exposed, made to run for their burrows. Else how could you control them and breed them? He pictured his fighting men as bees routing the rabbits. And he thought: The day hums sweetly when you have enough bees working for you.
    A door opened behind him. The Baron studied the reflection in the night-blackened viewport before turning.
    Piter de Vries advanced into the chamber followed by Umman Kudu, the captain of the Baron's personal guard. There was a motion of men just outside the door, the mutton faces of his guard, their expressions carefully sheep-like in his presence.
    The Baron turned.
    Piter touched finger to forelock in his mocking salute. "Good news, m'Lord. The Sardaukar have brought in the Duke." 
    "Of course they have," the Baron rumbled.
    He studied the somber mask of villainy on Piter's effeminate face. And the eyes: those shaded slits of bluest blue-in-blue.
    Soon I mast remove him, the Baron thought. He has almost outlasted his usefulness, almost reached the point of positive danger to my person. First, though, he must make the people of Arrakis hate him. Then--they will welcome my darling Feyd-Rautha as a savior.
    The Baron shifted his attention to the guard captain--Umman Kudu: scissors-line of jaw muscles, chin like a boot toe--a man to be trusted because the captain's vices were known.
    "First, where is the traitor who gave me the Duke?" the Baron asked. "I must give the traitor his reward." 
    Piter turned on one toe, motioned to the guard outside.
    A bit of black movement there and Yueh walked through. His motions were stiff and stringy. The mustache drooped beside his purple lips. Only the old eyes seemed alive. Yueh came to a stop three paces into the room, obeying a motion from Piter, and stood there staring across the open space at the Baron. 
    "Ah-h-h, Dr. Yueh." 
    "M'Lord Harkonnen." 
    "You've given us the Duke, I hear." 
    "My half of the bargain, m'Lord." 
    The Baron looked at Piter. 
    Piter nodded.
    The Baron looked back at Yueh. "The letter of the bargain, eh? And I . . ." He spat the words out: "What was I to do in return?" 
    "You remember quite well, m'Lord Harkonnen." 
    And Yueh allowed himself to think now, hearing the loud silence of clocks in his mind. He had seen the subtle betrayals in the Baron's manner. Wanna was indeed dead--gone far beyond their reach. Otherwise, there'd still be a hold on the weak doctor. The Baron's manner showed there was no hold; it was ended. 
    "Do I?" the Baron asked. 
    "You promised to deliver my Wanna from her agony." 
    The Baron nodded. "Oh, yes. Now, I remember. So I did. That was my promise. That was how we bent the Imperial Conditioning. You couldn't endure seeing your Bene Gesserit witch grovel in Piter's pain amplifiers. Well, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen always keeps his promises. I told you I'd free her from the agony and permit you to join her. So be it." He waved a hand at Piter.
    Piter's blue eyes took a glazed look. His movement was catlike in its sudden fluidity. The knife in his hand glistened like a claw as it flashed into Yueh's back.
    The old man stiffened, never taking his attention from the Baron. 
    "So join her!" the Baron spat.
    Yueh stood, swaying, His lips moved with careful precision, and his voice came in oddly measured cadence: "You . . . think . . . you . . . de . . . feated . . . me. You . . . think . . . I . . . did . . . not . . . know . . . what . . . I . . . bought . . . for . . . my . . . Wanna." 
    He toppled. No bending or softening. It was like a tree falling. 
    "So join her," the Baron repeated. But his words were like a weak echo.
    Yueh had filled him with a sense of foreboding. He whipped his attention to Piter, watched the man wipe the blade on a scrap of cloth, watched the creamy look of satisfaction in the blue eyes.
    So that's how he kills by his own hand, the Baron thought. It's well to know.
    "He did give us the Duke?" the Baron asked. 
    "Of a certainty, my Lord," Piter said. 
    "Then get him in here!" 
    Piter glanced at the guard captain, who whirled to obey.
    The Baron looked down at Yueh. From the way the man had fallen, you could suspect oak in him instead of bones.
    "I never could bring myself to trust a traitor," the Baron said. "Not even a traitor I created."
    He glanced at the night-shrouded viewport. That black bag of stillness out there was his, the Baron knew. There was no more crump of artillery against the Shield Wall caves; the burrow traps were sealed off. Quite suddenly, the Baron's mind could conceive of nothing more beautiful than that utter emptiness of black. Unless it were white on the black. Plated white on the black. Porcelain white.
    But there was still the feeling of doubt.
    What had the old fool of a doctor meant? Of course, he'd probably known what would happen to him in the end. But that bit about thinking he'd been defeated: "You think you defeated me." 
    What had he meant?
    The Duke Leto Atreides came through the door. His arms were bound in chains, the eagle face streaked with dirt. His uniform was torn where someone had ripped off his insignia. There were tatters at his waist where the shield belt had been removed without first freeing the uniform ties. The Duke's eyes held a glazed, insane look.
    "Wel-l-l-l," the Baron said. He hesitated, drawing in a deep breath. He knew he had spoken too loudly. This moment, long envisioned, had lost some of its savor. 
    Damn that cursed doctor through all eternity!
    "I believe the good Duke is drugged," Piter said. "That's how Yueh caught him for us." Piter turned to the Duke. "Aren't you drugged, my dear Duke?"
    The voice was far away. Leto could feel the chains, the ache of muscles, his cracked lips, his burning cheeks, the dry taste of thirst whispering its grit in his mouth. But sounds were dull, hidden by a cottony blanket. And he saw only dim shapes through the blanket.
    "What of the woman and the boy, Piter?" the Baron asked. "Any word yet?" 
    Piter's tongue darted over his lips.
    "You've heard something!" the Baron snapped. "What?" 
    Piter glanced at the guard captain, back to the Baron. "The men who were sent to do the job, m'Lord--they've . . . ah . . . been . . . ah . . . found." 
    "Well, they report everything satisfactory?" 
    "They're dead, m'Lord." 
    "Of course they are! What I want to know is--" 
    "They were dead when found, m'Lord." 
    The Baron's face went livid. "And the woman and boy?" 
    "No sign, m'Lord, but there was a worm. It came while the scene was being investigated. Perhaps it's as we wished--an accident. Possibly--"
    "We do not deal in possibilities, Piter. What of the missing 'thopter? Does that suggest anything to my Mentat?" 
    "One of the Duke's men obviously escaped in it, m'Lord. Killed our pilot and escaped." 
    "Which of the Duke's men?"
    "It was a clean, silent killing, m'Lord. Hawat, perhaps, or that Halleck one. Possibly Idaho. Or any top lieutenant." 
    "Possibilities," the Baron muttered. He glanced at the swaying, drugged figure of the Duke.
    "The situation is in hand, m'Lord," Piter said.
    "No, it isn't! Where is that stupid planetologist? Where is this man Kynes?"
    "We've word where to find him and he's been sent for, m'Lord."
    "I don't like the way the Emperor's servant is helping us," the Baron muttered.
    They were words through a cottony blanket, but some of them burned in Leto's mind. Woman and boy--no sign. Paul and Jessica had escaped. And the fate of Hawat, Halleck, and Idaho remained an unknown. There was still hope.
    "Where is the ducal signet ring?" the Baron demanded. "His finger is bare."
    "The Sardaukar say it was not on him when he was taken, my Lord," the guard captain said.
    "You killed the doctor too soon," the Baron said. "That was a mistake. You should've warned me, Piter. You moved too precipitately for the good of our enterprise." He scowled. "Possibilities!"
    The thought hung like a sine wave in Leto's mind: Paul and Jessica have escaped! And there was something else in his memory: a bargain. He could almost remember it. 
    The tooth!
    He remembered part of it now: a pill of poison gas shaped into a false tooth.
    Someone had told him to remember the tooth. The tooth was in his mouth. He could feel its shape with his tongue. All he had to do was bite sharply on it. 
    Not yet!
    The someone had told him to wait until he was near the Baron. Who had told him? He couldn't remember.
    "How long will he remain drugged like this?" the Baron asked. 
    "Perhaps another hour, m'Lord."
    "Perhaps," the Baron muttered. Again, he turned to the night-blackened window. "I am hungry."
    That's the Baron, that fuzzy gray shape there, Leto thought. The shape danced back and forth, swaying with the movement of the room. And the room expanded and contracted. It grew brighter and darker. It folded into blackness and faded.
    Time became a sequence of layers for the Duke. He drifted up through them. I must wait.
    There was a table. Leto saw the table quite clearly. And a gross, fat man on the other side of the table, the remains of a meal in front of him. Leto felt himself sitting in a chair across from the fat man, felt the chains, the straps that held his tingling body in the chair. He was aware there had been a passage of time, but its length escaped him.
    "I believe he's coming around. Baron." 
    A silky voice, that one. That was Piter. 
    "So I see, Piter." 
    A rumbling basso: the Baron.
    Leto sensed increasing definition in his surroundings. The chair beneath him took on firmness, the bindings were sharper.
    And he saw the Baron clearly now. Leto watched the movements of the man's hands: compulsive touchings--the edge of a plate, the handle of a spoon, a finger tracing the fold of a jowl. 
    Leto watched the moving hand, fascinated by it.
    "You can hear me, Duke Leto," the Baron said. "I know you can hear me. We want to know from you where to find your concubine and the child you sired on her."
    No sign escaped Leto, but the words were a wash of calmness through him. It's true, then: they don't have Paul and Jessica.
    "This is not a child's game we play," the Baron rumbled. "You must know that." He leaned toward Leto, studying the face. It pained the Baron that this could not be handled privately, just between the two of them. To have others see royalty in such straits--it set a bad precedent.
    Leto could feel strength returning. And now, the memory of the false tooth stood out in his mind like a steeple in a flat landscape. The nerve-shaped capsule within that tooth--the poison gas--he remembered who had put the deadly weapon in his mouth. 
    Yueh.
    Drug-fogged memory of seeing a limp corpse dragged past him in this room hung like a vapor in Leto's mind. He knew it had been Yueh.
    "Do you hear that noise, Duke Leto?" the Baron asked.
    Leto grew conscious of a frog sound, the burred mewling of someone's agony.
    "We caught one of your men disguised as a Fremen, " the Baron said. "We penetrated the disguise quite easily: the eyes, you know. He insists he was sent among the Fremen to spy on them. I've lived for a time on this planet, cher cousin. One does not spy on those ragged scum of the desert. Tell me, did you buy their help? Did you send your woman and son to them?"
    Leto felt fear tighten his chest. If Yueh sent them to the desert fold . . . the search won't stop until they 're found.
    "Come, come," the Baron said. "We don't have much time and pain is quick. Please don't bring it to this, my dear Duke." The Baron looked up at Piter who stood at Leto's shoulder. "Piter doesn't have all his tools here, but I'm sure he could improvise."
    "Improvisation is sometimes the best, Baron." 
    That silky, insinuating voice! Leto heard it at his ear.
    "You had an emergency plan," the Baron said. "Where have your woman and the boy been sent?" He looked at Leto's hand. "Your ring is missing. Does the boy have it?" 
    The Baron looked up, stared into Leto's eyes.
    "You don't answer," he said. "Will you force me to do a thing I do not want to do? Piter will use simple, direct methods. I agree they're sometimes the best, but it's not good that you should be subjected to such things."
    "Hot tallow on the back, perhaps, or on the eyelids," Piter said. "Perhaps on other portions of the body. It's especially effective when the subject doesn't know where the tallow will fall next. It's a good method and there's a sort of beauty in the pattern of pus-white blisters on naked skin, eh,  Baron?" 
    "Exquisite," the Baron said, and his voice sounded sour.
    Those touching fingers! Leto watched the fat hands, the glittering jewels on baby-fat hands--their compulsive wandering.
    The sounds of agony coming through the door behind him gnawed at the Duke's nerves. Who is it they caught? he wondered. Could it have been Idaho?
    "Believe me, cher cousin," the Baron said. "I do not want it to come to this."
    "You think of nerve couriers racing to summon help that cannot come," Piter said. "There's an artistry in this, you know." 
    "You're a superb artist," the Baron growled. "Now, have the decency to be silent."
    Leto suddenly recalled a thing Gurney Halleck had said once, seeing a picture of the Baron: " 'And I stood upon the sand of the sea and saw a beast rise up out of the sea . . . and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.' "
    "We waste time, Baron," Piter said. 
    "Perhaps."
    The Baron nodded. "You know, my dear Leto, you'll tell us in the end where they are. There's a level of pain that'll buy you." 
    He's most likely correct, Leto thought. Were if not for the tooth . . . and the fact that I truly don't know where they are.
    The Baron picked up a sliver of meat, pressed the morsel into his mouth, chewed slowly, swallowed. We must try a new tack, he thought.
    "Observe this prize person who denies he's for hire," the Baron said. "Observe him, Piter."
    And the Baron thought: Yes! See him there, this man who believes he cannot be bought. See him detained there by a million shares of himself sold in dribbles every second of his life! If you took him up now and shook him, he'd rattle inside. Emptied! Sold out! What difference how he dies now?
    The frog sounds in the background stopped.
    The Baron saw Umman Kudu, the guard captain, appear in the doorway across the room, shake his head. The captive hadn't produced the needed information. Another failure. Time to quit stalling with this fool Duke, this stupid soft fool who didn't realize how much hell there was so near him--only a nerve's thickness away.
    This thought calmed the Baron, overcoming his reluctance to have a royal person subject to pain. He saw himself suddenly as a surgeon exercising endless supple scissor dissections--cutting away the masks from fools, exposing the hell beneath. 
    Rabbits, all of them!
    And how they cowered when they saw the carnivore!
    Leto stared across the table, wondering why he waited. The tooth would end it all quickly. Still--it had been good, much of this life. He found himself remembering an antenna kite updangling in the shell-blue sky of Caladan, and Paul laughing with joy at the sight of it. And he remembered sunrise here on Arrakis--colored strata of the Shield Wall mellowed by dust haze.
    "Too bad," the Baron muttered. He pushed himself back from the table, stood up lightly in his suspensors and hesitated, seeing a change come over the Duke. He saw the man draw in a deep breath, the jawline stiffen, the ripple of a muscle there as the Duke clamped his mouth shut.
    How he fears me! the Baron thought.
    Shocked by fear that the Baron might escape him, Leto bit sharply on the capsule tooth, felt it break. He opened his mouth, expelled the biting vapor he could taste as it formed on his tongue. The Baron grew smaller, a figure seen in a tightening tunnel. Leto heard a gasp beside his ear--the silky-voiced one: Piter. 
    It got him, too!
    "Piter! What's wrong?" 
    The rumbling voice was far away.
    Leto sensed memories rolling in his mind--the old toothless mutterings of hags. The room, the table, the Baron, a pair of terrified eyes--blue within blue, the eyes--all compressed around him in ruined symmetry.
    There was a man with a boot-toe chin, a toy man falling. The toy man had a broken nose slanted to the left: an offbeat metronome caught forever at the start of an upward stroke. Leto heard the crash of crockery--so distant--a roaring in his ears. His mind was a bin without end, catching everything. Everything that had ever been: every shout, every whisper, every . . . silence.
    One thought remained to him. Leto saw it in formless light on rays of black: The day the flesh shapes and the flesh the day shapes. The thought struck him with a sense of fullness he knew he could never explain. 
    Silence.
    The Baron stood with his back against his private door, his own bolt hole behind the table. He had slammed it on a room full of dead men. His senses took in guards swarming around him. Did I breathe it? he asked himself. Whatever it was in there, did it get me, too?
    Sounds returned to him . . . and reason. He heard someone shouting orders--gas masks . . . keep a door closed . . . get blowers going.
    The others fell quickly, he thought. I'm still standing. I'm still breathing. Merciless hell! That was close!
    He could analyze it now. His shield had been activated, set low but still enough to slow molecular interchange across the field barrier. And he had been pushing himself away from the table . . . that and Piter's shocked gasp which had brought the guard captain darting forward into his own doom.
    Chance and the warning in a dying man's gasp--these had saved him.
    The Baron felt no gratitude to Piter. The fool had got himself killed. And that stupid guard captain! He'd said he scoped everyone before bringing them into the Baron's presence! How had it been possible for the Duke . . . ? No warning. Not even from the poison snooper over the table--until it was too late. How?
    Well, no matter now, the Baron thought, his mind firming. The next guard captain will begin by finding answers to these questions.
    He grew aware of more activity down the hall--around the corner at the other door to that room of death. The Baron pushed himself away from his own door, studied the lackeys around him. They stood there staring, silent, waiting for the Baron's reaction. 
    Would the Baron be angry?
    And the Baron realized only a few seconds had passed since his flight from that terrible room.
    Some of the guards had weapons leveled at the door. Some were directing their ferocity toward the empty hall that stretched away toward the noises around the corner to their right.
    A man came striding around that corner, gas mask dangling by its straps at his neck, his eyes intent on the overhead poison snoopers that lined this corridor. He was yellow-haired, flat of face with green eyes. Crisp lines radiated from his thick-lipped mouth. He looked like some water creature misplaced among those who walked the land.
    The Baron stared at the approaching man, recalling the name: Nefud. Iakin Nefud. Guard corporal. Nefud was addicted to semuta, the drug-music combination that played itself in the deepest consciousness. A useful item of information, that.
    The man stopped in front of the Baron, saluted. "Corridor's clear, m'Lord. I was outside watching and saw that it must be poison gas. Ventilators in your room were pulling air in from these corridors." He glanced up at the snooper over the Baron's head. "None of the stuff escaped. We have the room cleaned out now. What are your orders?"
    The Baron recognized the man's voice--the one who'd been shouting orders. Efficient, this corporal, he thought. 
    "They're all dead in there?" the Baron asked. 
    "Yes, m'Lord." 
    Well, we must adjust, the Baron thought.
    "First," he said, "let me congratulate you, Nefud. You're the new captain of my guard. And I hope you'll take to heart the lesson to be learned from the fate of your predecessor."
    The Baron watched the awareness grow in his newly promoted guardsman. Nefud knew he'd never again be without his semuta.
    Nefud nodded. "My Lord knows I'll devote myself entirely to his safety."
    "Yes. Well, to business. I suspect the Duke had something in his mouth. You will find out what that something was, how it was used, who helped him put it there. You'll take every precaution--" 
    He broke off, his chain of thought shattered by a disturbance in the corridor behind him--guards at the door to the lift from the lower levels of the frigate trying to hold back a tall colonel bashar who had just emerged from the lift.
    The Baron couldn't place the colonel bashar's face: thin with mouth like a slash in leather, twin ink spots for eyes.
    "Get your hands off me, you pack of carrion-eaters!" the man roared, and he dashed the guards aside. 
    Ah-h-h, one of the Sardaukar, the Baron thought.
    The colonel bashar came striding toward the Baron, whose eyes went to slits of apprehension. The Sardaukar officers filled him with unease. They all seemed to look like relatives of the Duke . . . the late Duke. And their manners with the Baron!
    The colonel bashar planted himself half a pace in front of the Baron, hands on hips. The guard hovered behind him in twitching uncertainty.
    The Baron noted the absence of salute, the disdain in the Sardaukar's manner, and his unease grew. There was only the one legion of them locally--ten brigades--reinforcing the Harkonnen legions, but the Baron did not fool himself. That one legion was perfectly capable of turning on the Harkonnens and overcoming them.
    "Tell your men they are not to prevent me from seeing you, Baron," the Sardaukar growled. "My men brought you the Atreides Duke before I could discuss his fate with you. We will discuss it now." 
    I must not lose face before my men, the Baron thought.
    "So?" It was a coldly controlled word, and the Baron felt proud of it.
    "My Emperor has charged me to make certain his royal cousin dies cleanly without agony," the colonel bashar said.
    "Such were the Imperial orders to me," the Baron lied. "Did you think I'd disobey?"
    "I'm to report to my Emperor what I see with my own eyes," the Sardaukar said.
    "The Duke's already dead," the Baron snapped, and he waved a hand to dismiss the fellow.
    The colonel bashar remained planted facing the Baron. Not by flicker of eye or muscle did he acknowledge he had been dismissed. "How?" he growled.
    Really! the Baron thought. This is too much.
    "By his own hand, if you must know," the Baron said. "He took poison." 
    "I will see the body now," the colonel Bashar said.
    The Baron raised his gaze to the ceiling in feigned exasperation while his thoughts raced. Damnation! This sharp-eyed Sardaukar will see the room before a thing's been changed! 
    "Now," the Sardaukar growled. "I'll see it with my own eyes." 
    There was no preventing it, the Baron realized. The Sardaukar would see all. He'd know the Duke had killed Harkonnen men . . . that the Baron most likely had escaped by a narrow margin. There was the evidence of the dinner remnants on the table, and the dead Duke across from it with destruction around him. 
    No preventing it at all.
    "I'll not be put off," the colonel bashar snarled. 
    "You're not being put off," the Baron said, and he stared into the Sardaukar's obsidian eyes. "I hide nothing from my Emperor." He nodded to Nefud. "The colonel bashar is to see everything, at once. Take him in by the door where you stood, Nefud." 
    "This way, sir," Nefud said.
    Slowly, insolently, the Sardaukar moved around the Baron, shouldered a way through the guardsmen.
    Insufferable, the Baron thought. Now, the Emperor will know how I slipped up. He'll recognize it as a sign of weakness.
    And it was agonizing to realize that the Emperor and his Sardaukar were alike in their disdain for weakness. The Baron chewed at his lower lip, consoling himself that the Emperor, at least, had not learned of the Atreides raid on Giedi Prime, the destruction of the Harkonnen spice stores there. 
    Damn that slippery Duke!
    The Baron watched the retreating backs--the arrogant Sardaukar and the stocky, efficient Nefud.
    We must adjust, the Baron thought. I'll have to put Rabban over this damnable planet once more. Without restraint. I must spend my own Harkonnen blood to put Arrakis into a proper condition for accepting Feyd-Rautha. Damn that Piter! He would get himself killed before I was through with him.
    The Baron sighed.
    And I must send at once to Tleielax for a new Mentat. They undoubtedly have the new one ready for me by now. 
    One of the guardsmen beside him coughed. 
    The Baron turned toward the man. "I am hungry." 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    "And I wish to be diverted while you're clearing out that room and studying its secrets for me," the Baron rumbled.
    The guardsman lowered his eyes. "What diversion does m'Lord wish?"
    "I'll be in my sleeping chambers," the Baron said. "Bring me that young fellow we bought on Gamont, the one with the lovely eyes. Drug him well. I don't feel like wrestling." 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    The Baron turned away, began moving with his bouncing, suspensor-buoyed pace toward his chambers. Yes, he thought. The one with the lovely eyes, the one who looks so much like the young Paul Atreides.

= = = = = =

O Seas of Caladan, 
O people of Duke Leto-- 
Citadel of Leto fallen, 
Fallen forever . . .
-from "Songs of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul felt that all his past, every experience before this night, had become sand curling in an hourglass. He sat near his mother hugging his knees within a small fabric and plastic hutment--a stilltent--that had come, like the Fremen clothing they now wore, from the pack left in the 'thopter.
    There was no doubt in Paul's mind who had put the Fremkit there, who had directed the course of the 'thopter carrying them captive. 
    Yueh.
    The traitor doctor had sent them directly into the hands of Duncan Idaho.
    Paul stared out the transparent end of the stilltent at the moonshadowed rocks that ringed this place where Idaho had hidden them.
    Hiding like a child when I'm now the Duke, Paul thought. He felt the thought gall him, but could not deny the wisdom in what they did.
    Something had happened to his awareness this night--he saw with sharpened clarity every circumstance and occurrence around him. He felt unable to stop the inflow of data or the cold precision with which each new item was added to his knowledge and the computation was centered in his awareness. It was Mentat power and more.
    Paul thought back to the moment of impotent rage as the strange 'thopter dived out of the night onto them, stooping like a giant hawk above the desert with wind screaming through its wings. The thing in Paul's mind had happened then. The 'thopter had skidded and slewed across a sand ridge toward the running figures--his mother and himself. Paul remembered how the smell of burned sulfur from abrasion of 'thopter skids against sand had drifted across them.
    His mother, he knew, had turned, expected to meet a lasgun in the hands of Harkonnen mercenaries, and had recognized Duncan Idaho leaning out the 'thopter's open door shouting: "Hurry! There's wormsign south of you!"
    But Paul had known as he turned who piloted the 'thopter. An accumulation of minutiae in the way it was flown, the dash of the landing--clues so small even his mother hadn't detected them--had told Paul precisely who sat at those controls.
    Across the stilltent from Paul, Jessica stirred, said: "There can be only one explanation. The Harkonnens held Yueh's wife. He hated the Harkonnens! I cannot be wrong about that. You read his note. But why has he saved us from the carnage?" 
    She is only now seeing it and that poorly, Paul thought. The thought was a shock. He had known this fact as a by-the-way thing while reading the note that had accompanied the ducal signet in the pack.
    "Do not try to forgive me," Yueh had written. "I do not want your forgiveness. I already have enough burdens. What I have done was done without malice or hope of another's understanding. It is my own tahaddi al-burhan, my ultimate test. I give you the Atreides ducal signet as token that I write truly. By the time you read this, Duke Leto will be dead. Take consolation from my assurance that he did not die alone, that one we hate above all others died with him."
    It had not been addressed or signed, but there 'd been no mistaking the familiar scrawl--Yueh's.
    Remembering the letter, Paul re-experienced the distress of that moment--a thing sharp and strange that seemed to happen outside his new mentat alertness. He had read that his father was dead, known the truth of the words, but had felt them as no more than another datum to be entered in his mind and used.
    I loved my father, Paul thought, and knew this for truth. I should mourn him. I should feel something.
    But he felt nothing except: Here's an important fact. 
    It was one with all the other facts.
    All the while his mind was adding sense impressions, extrapolating, computing.
    Halleck's words came back to Paul: "Mood's a thing for cattle or for making love. You fight when the necessity arises, no matter your mood. "
    Perhaps that's it, Paul thought. I'll mourn my father later . . . when there's time.
    But he felt no letup in the cold precision of his being. He sensed that his new awareness was only a beginning, that it was growing. The sense of terrible purpose he'd first experienced in his ordeal with the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam pervaded him. His right hand--the hand of remembered pain--tingled and throbbed.
    Is this what it is to be their Kwisatz Haderach? he wondered.
    "For a while, I thought Hawat had failed us again, "Jessica said. "I thought perhaps Yueh wasn't a Suk doctor."
    "He was everything we thought him . . . and more," Paul said. And he thought: Why is she so slow seeing these things? He said, "If Idaho doesn't get through to Kynes, we'll be--" 
    "He's not our only hope," she said. 
    "Such was not my suggestion," he said.
    She heard the steel in his voice, the sense of command, and stared across the grey darkness of the stilltent at him. Paul was a silhouette against moon-frosted rocks seen through the tent's transparent end.
    "Others among your father's men will have escaped," she said. "We must regather them, find--"
    "We will depend upon ourselves," he said. "Our immediate concern is our family atomics. We must get them before the Harkonnens can search them out."
    "Not likely they'll be found," she said, "the way they were hidden." 
    "It must not be left to chance."
    And she thought: Blackmail with the family atomics as a threat to the planet and its spice--that's what he has in mind. But all he can hope for then is escape into renegade anonymity.
    His mother's words had provoked another train of thought in Paul--a duke's concern for all the people they'd lost this night. People are the true strength of a Great House, Paul thought. And he remembered Hawat's words: "Parting with people is a sadness; a place is only a place."
    "They're using Sardaukar," Jessica said. "We must wait until the Sardaukar have been withdrawn."
    "They think us caught between the desert and the Sardaukar," Paul said. "They intend that there be no Atreides survivors--total extermination. Do not count on any of our people escaping." 
    "They cannot go on indefinitely risking exposure of the Emperor's part in this." 
    "Can't they?" 
    "Some of our people are bound to escape." 
    "Are they?"
    Jessica turned away, frightened of the bitter strength in her son's voice, hearing the precise assessment of chances. She sensed that his mind had leaped ahead of her, that it now saw more in some respects than she did. She had helped train the intelligence which did this, but now she found herself fearful of it. Her thoughts turned, seeking toward the lost sanctuary of her Duke, and tears burned her eyes.
    This is the way it had to be, Leto, she thought. "A time of love and a time of grief." She rested her hand on her abdomen, awareness focused on the embryo there. I have the Atreides daughter I was ordered to produce, but the Reverend Mother was wrong: a daughter wouldn't have saved my Leto. This child is only life reaching for the future in the midst of death. I conceived out of instinct and not out of obedience.
    "Try the communinet receiver again," Paul said.
    The mind goes on working no matter how we try to hold it back, she thought.
    Jessica found the tiny receiver Idaho had left for them, flipped its switch. A green light glowed on the instrument's face. Tinny screeching came from its speaker. She reduced the volume, hunted across the bands. A voice speaking Atreides battle language came into the tent.
    " . . . back and regroup at the ridge. Fedor reports no survivors in Carthag and the Guild Bank has been sacked."
    Carthag! Jessica thought. That was a Harkonnen hotbed.
    "They're Sardaukar," the voice said. "Watch out for Sardaukar in Atreides uniforms. They're . . . " 
    A roaring filled the speaker, then silence. 
    "Try the other bands," Paul said.
    "Do you realize what that means?" Jessica asked.
    "I expected it. They want the Guild to blame us for destruction of their bank. With the Guild against us, we're trapped on Arrakis. Try the other bands."
    She weighed his words: I expected it. What had happened to him? Slowly, Jessica returned to the instrument. As she moved the bandslide, they caught glimpses of violence in the few voices calling out in Atreides battle language: " . . . fallback . . . " " . . . try to regroup at . . . " " . . . trapped in a cave at . . . ." 
    And there was no mistaking the victorious exultation in the Harkonnen gibberish that poured from the other bands. Sharp commands, battle reports. There wasn't enough of it for Jessica to register and break the language, but the tone was obvious. 
    Harkonnen victory.
    Paul shook the pack beside him, hearing the two literjons of water gurgle there. He took a deep breath, looked up through the transparent end of the tent at the rock escarpment outlined against the stars. His left hand felt the sphincter-seal of the tent's entrance. "It'll be dawn soon," he said. "We can wait through the day for Idaho, but not through another night. In the desert, you must travel by night and rest in shade through the day."
    Remembered lore insinuated itself into Jessica's mind: Without a stillsuit, a man sitting in shade on the desert needs five liters of water a day to maintain body weight. She felt the slick-soft skin of the stillsuit against her body, thinking how their lives depended on these garments.
    "If we leave here, Idaho can't find us," she said.
    "There are ways to make any man talk," he said. "If Idaho hasn't returned by dawn, we must consider the possibility he has been captured. How long do you think he could hold out?" 
    The question required no answer, and she sat in silence.
    Paul lifted the seal on the pack, pulled out a tiny micromanual with glowtab and magnifier. Green and orange letters leaped up at him from the pages: "literjons, stilltent, energy caps, recaths, sandsnork, binoculars, stillsuit repkit, baradye pistol, sinkchart, filt-plugs, paracompass, maker hooks, thumpers, Fremkit, fire pillar . . . " 
    So many things for survival on the desert. 
    Presently, he put the manual aside on the tent floor. 
    "Where can we possibly go?" Jessica asked.
    "My father spoke of desert power," Paul said. "The Harkonnens cannot rule this planet without it. They've never ruled this planet, nor shall they. Not even with ten thousand legions of Sardaukar." 
    "Paul, you can't think that--"
    "We've all the evidence in our hands," he said. "Right here in this tent--the tent itself, this pack and its contents, these stillsuits. We know the Guild wants a prohibitive price for weather satellites. We know that--"
    "What've weather satellites to do with it?" she asked. "They couldn't possibly . . . " She broke off.
    Paul sensed the hyperalertness of his mind reading her reactions, computing on minutiae. "You see it now," he said. "Satellites watch the terrain below. There are things in the deep desert that will not bear frequent inspection." 
    "You're suggesting the Guild itself controls this planet?" 
    She was so slow.
    "No!" he said. "The Fremen! They're paying the Guild for privacy, paying in a coin that's freely available to anyone with desert power--spice. This is more than a second-approximation answer; it's the straight-line computation. Depend on it."
    "Paul." Jessica said, "you're not a Mentat yet; you can't know for sure how--"
    "I'll never be a Mentat," he said. "I'm something else . . . a freak." 
    "Paul! How can you say such--" 
    "Leave me alone!"
    He turned away from her, looking out into the night. Why can't I mourn? he wondered. He felt that every fiber of his being craved this release, but it would be denied him forever.
    Jessica had never heard such distress in her son's voice. She wanted to reach out to him, hold him, comfort him, help him--but she sensed there was nothing she could do. He had to solve this problem by himself.
    The glowing tab of the Fremkit manual between them on the tent floor caught her eye. She lifted it, glanced at the flyleaf, reading: "Manual of 'The Friendly Desert,' the place full of life. Here are the ayat and burhan of Life. Believe, and al-Lat shall never burn you."
    It reads like the Azhar Book, she thought, recalling her studies of the Great Secrets. Has a Manipulator of Religions been on Arrakis?
    Paul lifted the paracompass from the pack, returned it, said: "Think of all these special-application Fremen machines. They show unrivaled sophistication. Admit it. The culture that made these things betrays depths no one suspected."
    Hesitating, still worried by the harshness in his voice, Jessica returned to the book, studied an illustrated constellation from the Arrakeen sky: "Muad'Dib: The Mouse," and noted that the tail pointed north.
    Paul stared into the tent's darkness at the dimly discerned movements of his mother revealed by the manual's glowtab. Now is the time to carry out my father's wish, he thought. I must give her his message now while she has time for grief. Grief would inconvenience us later. And he found himself shocked by precise logic. 
    "Mother," he said. 
    "Yes?"
    She heard the change in his voice, felt coldness in her entrails at the sound. Never had she heard such harsh control. 
    "My father is dead," he said.
    She searched within herself for the coupling of fact and fact and fact--the Bene Gesserit way of assessing data--and it came to her: the sensation of terrifying loss. 
    Jessica nodded, unable to speak.
    "My father charged me once," Paul said, "to give you a message if anything happened to him. He feared you might believe he distrusted you." 
    That useless suspicion, she thought.
    "He wanted you to know he never suspected you," Paul said, and explained the deception, adding: "He wanted you to know he always trusted you completely, always loved you and cherished you. He said he would sooner have mistrusted himself and he had but one regret--that he never made you his Duchess." 
    She brushed the tears coursing down her cheeks, thought: What a stupid waste of the body's water! But she knew this thought for what it was--the attempt to retreat from grief into anger. Leto, my Leto, she thought. What terrible things we do to those we love! With a violent motion, she extinguished the little manual's glowtab. 
    Sobs shook her.
    Paul heard his mother's grief and felt the emptiness within himself. I have no grief, he thought. Why? Why? He felt the inability to grieve as a terrible flaw.
    "A time to get and time to lose," Jessica thought, quoting to herself from the O.C. Bible. "A time to keep and a time to cast away; a time for love and a time to hate; a time of war and a time of peace. "
    Paul's mind had gone on in its chilling precision. He saw the avenues ahead of them on this hostile planet. Without even the safety valve of dreaming, he focused his prescient awareness, seeing it as a computation of most probable futures, but with something more, an edge of mystery--as though his mind dipped into some timeless stratum and sampled the winds of the future.
    Abruptly, as though he had found a necessary key, Paul's mind climbed another notch in awareness. He felt himself clinging to this new level, clutching at a precarious hold and peering about. It was as though he existed within a globe with avenues radiating away in all directions . . . yet this only approximated the sensation.
    He remembered once seeing a gauze kerchief blowing in the wind and now he sensed the future as though it twisted across some surface as undulant and impermanent as that of the windblown kerchief.
    He saw people.
    He felt the heat and cold of uncounted probabilities.
    He knew names and places, experienced emotions without number, reviewed data of innumerable unexplored crannies. There was time to probe and test and taste, but no time to shape.
    The thing was a spectrum of possibilities from the most remote past to the most remote future--from the most probable to the most improbable. He saw his own death in countless ways. He saw new planets, new cultures. 
    People. 
    People.
    He saw them in such swarms they could not be listed, yet his mind catalogued them.
    Even the Guildsmen.
    And he thought: The Guild--there' d be a way for us, my strangeness accepted as a familiar thing of high value, always with an assured supply of the now-necessary spice.
    But the idea of living out his life in the mind-groping-ahead-through-possible-futures that guided hurtling spaceships appalled him. It was a way, though. And in meeting the possible future that contained Guildsmen he recognized his own strangeness.
    I have another kind of sight. I see another kind of terrain: the available paths.
    The awareness conveyed both reassurance and alarm--so many places on that other kind of terrain dipped or turned out of his sight.
    As swiftly as it had come, the sensation slipped away from him, and he realized the entire experience had taken the space of a heartbeat.
    Yet, his own personal awareness had been turned over, illuminated in a terrifying way. He stared around him.
    Night still covered the stilltent within its rock-enclosed hideaway. His mother's grief could still be heard.
    His own lack of grief could still be felt . . . that hollow place somewhere separated from his mind, which went on in its steady pace--dealing with data, evaluating, computing, submitting answers in something like the Mentat way.
    And now he saw that he had a wealth of data few such minds ever before had encompassed. But this made the empty place within him no easier to bear. He felt that something must shatter. It was as though a clockwork control for a bomb had been set to ticking within him. It went on about its business no matter what he wanted. It recorded minuscule shadings of difference around him--a slight change in moisture, a fractional fall in temperature, the progress of an insect across their stilltent roof, the solemn approach of dawn in the starlighted patch of sky he could see out the tent's transparent end.
    The emptiness was unbearable. Knowing how the clockwork had been set in motion made no difference. He could look to his own past and see the start of it--the training, the sharpening of talents, the refined pressures of sophisticated disciplines, even exposure to the O.C. Bible at a critical moment . . . and, lastly, the heavy intake of spice. And he could look ahead--the most terrifying direction--to see where it all pointed. 
    I'm a monster! he thought. A freak! 
    "No," he said. Then: "No. No! NO!"
    He found that he was pounding the tent floor with his fists. (The implacable part of him recorded this as an interesting emotional datum and fed it into computation.) 
    "Paul!"
    His mother was beside him, holding his hands, her face a gray blob peering at him. "Paul, what's wrong?" 
    "You!" he said.
    "I'm here, Paul," she said. "It's all right." 
    "What have you done to me?" he demanded.
    In a burst of clarity, she sensed some of the roots in the question, said: "I gave birth to you."
    It was, from instinct as much as her own subtle knowledge, the precisely correct answer to calm him. He felt her hands holding him, focused on the dim outline of her face. (Certain gene traces in her facial structure were noted in the new way by his onflowing mind, the clues added to other data, and a final-summation answer put forward.) 
    "Let go of me," he said.
    She heard the iron in his voice, obeyed. "Do you want to tell me what's wrong, Paul?"
    "Did you know what you were doing when you trained me?" he asked.
    There's no more childhood in his voice, she thought. And she said: "I hoped the thing any parent hopes--that you'd be . . . superior, different." 
    "Different?" 
    She heard the bitterness in his tone, said: "Paul, I--" 
    "You didn't want a son!" he said. "You wanted a Kwisatz Haderach! You wanted a male Bene Gesserit!" 
    She recoiled from his bitterness. "But Paul . . ." 
    "Did you ever consult my father in this?"
    She spoke gently out of the freshness of her grief: "Whatever you are, Paul, the heredity is as much your father as me." 
    "But not the training," he said. "Not the things that . . . awakened . . . the sleeper." 
    "Sleeper?"
    "It's here." He put a hand to his head and then to his breast. "In me. It goes on and on and on and on and--"
    "Paul!" 
    She had heard the hysteria edging his voice.
    "Listen to me," he said. "You wanted the Reverend Mother to hear about my dreams: You listen in her place now. I've just had a waking dream. Do you know why?" 
    "You must calm yourself," she said. "If there's--" 
    "The spice," he said, "It's in everything here--the air, the soil, the food. The geriatric spice. It's like the Truthsayer drug. It's a poison!" 
    She stiffened.
    His voice lowered and he repeated: "A poison--so subtle, so insidious . . . so irreversible. It won't even kill you unless you stop taking it. We can't leave Arrakis unless we take part of Arrakis with us." 
    The terrifying presence of his voice brooked no dispute.
    "You and the spice," Paul said. "The spice changes anyone who gets this much of it, but thanks to you, I could bring the change to consciousness. I don't get to leave it in the unconscious where its disturbance can be blanked out. I can see it." 
    "Paul, you--" 
    "I see it!" he repeated.
    She heard madness in his voice, didn't know what to do.
    But he spoke again, and she heard the iron control return to him: "We're trapped here." 
    We're trapped here, she agreed.
    And she accepted the truth of his words. No pressure of the Bene Gesserit, no trickery or artifice could pry them completely free from Arrakis: the spice was addictive. Her body had known the fact long before her mind awakened to it.
    So here we live out our lives, she thought, on this hell-planet. The place is prepared for us, if we can evade the Harkonnens. And there's no doubt of my course: a broodmare preserving an important bloodline for the Bene Gesserit Plan.
    "I must tell you about my waking dream," Paul said. (Now there was fury in his voice.) "To be sure you accept what I say, I'll tell you first I know you'll bear a daughter, my sister, here on Arrakis." 
    Jessica placed her hands against the tent floor, pressed back against the curving fabric wall to still a pang of fear. She knew her pregnancy could not show yet. Only her own Bene Gesserit training had allowed her to read the first faint signals of her body, to know of the embryo only a few weeks old.
    "Only to serve," Jessica whispered, clinging to the Bene Gesserit motto. "We exist only to serve."
    "We'll find a home among the Fremen," Paul said, "where your Missionaria Protectiva has bought us a bolt hole." 
    They've prepared a way for us in the desert, Jessica told herself. But how can he know of the Missionaria Protectiva? She found it increasingly difficult to subdue her terror at the overpowering strangeness in Paul.
    He studied the dark shadow of her, seeing her fear and every reaction with his new awareness as though she were outlined in blinding light. A beginning of compassion for her crept over him.
    "The things that can happen here, I cannot begin to tell you," he said. "I cannot even begin to tell myself, although I've seen them. This sense of the future--I seem to have no control over it. The thing just happens. The immediate future--say, a year--I can see some of that . . . a road as broad as our Central Avenue on Caladan. Some places I don't see . . . shadowed places . . . as though it went behind a hill" (and again he thought of the surface of a blowing kerchief) " . . . and there are branchings . . . "
    He fell silent as memory of that seeing filled him. No prescient dream, no experience of his life had quite prepared him for the totality with which the veils had been ripped away to reveal naked time.
    Recalling the experience, he recognized his own terrible purpose--the pressure of his life spreading outward like an expanding bubble . . . time retreating before it . . . 
    Jessica found the tent's glowtab control, activated it.
    Dim green light drove back the shadows, easing her fear. She looked at Paul's face, his eyes--the inward stare. And she knew where she had seen such a look before: pictured in records of disasters--on the faces of children who experienced starvation or terrible injury. The eyes were like pits, mouth a straight line, cheeks indrawn.
    It's the look of terrible awareness, she thought, of someone forced to the knowledge of his own mortality. 
    He was, indeed, no longer a child.
    The underlying import of his words began to take over in her mind, pushing all else aside. Paul could see ahead, a way of escape for them.
    "There's a way to evade the Harkonnens," she said.
    "The Harkonnens!" he sneered. "Put those twisted humans out of your mind." He stared at his mother, studying the lines of her face in the light of the glowtab. The lines betrayed her. 
    She said: "You shouldn't refer to people as humans without--" 
    "Don't be so sure you know where to draw the line," he said. "We carry our past with us. And, mother mine, there's a thing you don't know and should--we are Harkonnens."
    Her mind did a terrifying thing: it blanked out as though it needed to shut off all sensation. But Paul's voice went on at that implacable pace, dragging her with it.
    "When next you find a mirror, study your face--study mine now. The traces are there if you don't blind yourself. Look at my hands, the set of my bones. And if none of this convinces you, then take my word for it. I've walked the future, I've looked at a record, I've seen a place, I have all the data. We're Harkonnens." 
    "A . . . renegade branch of the family," she said. "That's it, isn't it? Some Harkonnen cousin who--"
    "You're the Baron's own daughter," he said, and watched the way she pressed her hands to her mouth. "The Baron sampled many pleasures in his youth, and once permitted himself to be seduced. But it was for the genetic purposes of the Bene Gesserit, by one of you."
    The way he said 'you' struck her like a slap. But it set her mind to working and she could not deny his words. So many blank ends of meaning in her past reached out now and linked. The daughter the Bene Gesserit wanted--it wasn't to end the old Atreides-Harkonnen feud, but to fix some genetic factor in their lines. What? She groped for an answer.
    As though he saw inside her mind, Paul said: "They thought they were reaching for me. But I'm not what they expected, and I've arrived before my time. And they don't know it." 
    Jessica pressed her hands to her mouth. 
    Great Mother! He's the Kwisatz Haderach!
    She felt exposed and naked before him, realizing then that he saw her with eyes from which little could be hidden. And that, she knew, was the basis of her fear.
    "You're thinking I'm the Kwisatz Haderach," he said. "Put that out of your mind. I'm something unexpected."
    I must get word out to one of the schools, she thought. The mating index may show what has happened.
    "They won't learn about me until it's too late," he said.
    She sought to divert him, lowered her hands and said: "We'll find a place among the Fremen?"
    "The Fremen have a saying they credit to Shai-hulud, Old Father Eternity," he said. "They say: 'Be prepared to appreciate what you meet.' "
    And he thought: Yes, mother mine--among the Fremen. You'll acquire the blue eyes and a callus beside your lovely nose from the filter tube to your stillsuit . . . and you'll bear my sister: St. Alia of the Knife.
    "If you're not the Kwisatz Haderach," Jessica said, "what--" 
    "You couldn't possibly know," he said. "You won't believe it until you see it." 
    And he thought: I'm a seed.
    He suddenly saw how fertile was the ground into which he had fallen, and with this realization, the terrible purpose filled him, creeping through the empty place within, threatening to choke him with grief.
    He had seen two main branchings along the way ahead--in one he confronted an evil old Baron and said: "Hello, Grandfather." The thought of that path and what lay along it sickened him.
    The other path held long patches of grey obscurity except for peaks of violence. He had seen a warrior religion there, a fire spreading across the universe with the Atreides green and black banner waving at the head of fanatic legions drunk on spice liquor. Gurney Halleck and a few others of his father's men--a pitiful few--were among them, all marked by the hawk symbol from the shrine of his father's skull.
    "I can't go that way," he muttered. "That's what the old witches of your schools really want." 
    "I don't understand you, Paul," his mother said.
    He remained silent, thinking like the seed he was, thinking with the race consciousness he had first experienced as terrible purpose. He found that he no longer could hate the Bene Gesserit or the Emperor or even the Harkonnens. They were all caught up in the need of their race to renew its scattered inheritance, to cross and mingle and infuse their bloodlines in a great new pooling of genes. And the race knew only one sure way for this--the ancient way, the tried and certain way that rolled over everything in its path: jihad. 
    Surely, I cannot choose that way, he thought.
    But he saw again in his mind's eye the shrine of his father's skull and the violence with the green and black banner waving in its midst.
    Jessica cleared her throat, worried by his silence. "Then . . . the Fremen will give us sanctuary?"
    He looked up, staring across the green-lighted tent at the inbred, patrician lines of her face. "Yes," he said. "That's one of the ways." He nodded. "Yes. They'll call me . . . Muad'Dib, 'The One Who Points the Way.' Yes . . . that's what they'll call me." 
    And he closed his eyes, thinking: Now, my father, I can mourn you. And he felt the tears coursing down his cheeks.

= = = = = =

Book Two
MUAD'DIB

= = = = = =

When my father, the Padishah Emperor, heard of Duke Leto's death and the manner of it, he went into such a rage as we had never before seen. He blamed my mother and the compact forced on him to place a Bene Gesserit on the throne. He blamed the Guild and the evil old Baron. He blamed everyone in sight, not excepting even me, for he said I was a witch like all the others. And when I sought to comfort him, saying it was done according to an older law of self-preservation to which even the most ancient rulers gave allegiance, he sneered at me and asked if I thought him a weakling. I saw then that he had been aroused to this passion not by concern over the dead Duke but by what that death implied for all royalty. As I look back on it, I think there may have been some prescience in my father, too, for it is certain that his line and Muad'Dib's shared common ancestry.
-"In My Father's House," by the Princess Irulan

    "Now Harkonnen shall kill Harkonnen," Paul whispered.
    He had awakened shortly before nightfall, sitting up in the sealed and darkened stilltent. As he spoke, he heard the vague stirrings of his mother where she slept against the tent's opposite wall.
    Paul glanced at the proximity detector on the floor, studying the dials illuminated in the blackness by phosphor tubes.
    "It should be night soon," his mother said. "Why don't you lift the tent shades?"
    Paul realized then that her breathing had been different for some time, that she had lain silent in the darkness until certain he was awake.
    "Lifting the shades wouldn't help," he said. "There's been a storm. The tent's covered by sand. I'll dig us out soon." 
    "No sign of Duncan yet?" 
    "None."
    Paul rubbed absently at the ducal signet on his thumb, and a sudden rage against the very substance of this planet which had helped kill his father set him trembling. 
    "I heard the storm begin," Jessica said.
    The undemanding emptiness of her words helped restore some of his calm. His mind focused on the storm as he had seen it begin through the transparent end of their stilltent--cold dribbles of sand crossing the basin, then runnels and tails furrowing the sky. He had looked up to a rock spire, seen it change shape under the blast, becoming a low, Cheddar-colored wedge. Sand funneled into their basin had shadowed the sky with dull curry, then blotted out all light as the tent was covered.
    Tent bows had creaked once as they accepted the pressure, then--silence broken only by the dim bellows wheezing of their sand snorkel pumping air from the surface. 
    "Try the receiver again," Jessica said. 
    "No use," he said.
    He found his stillsuit's watertube in its clip at his neck, drew a warm swallow into his mouth, and he thought that here he truly began an Arrakeen existence--living on reclaimed moisture from his own breath and body. It was flat and tasteless water, but it soothed his throat.
    Jessica heard Paul drinking, felt the slickness of her own stillsuit clinging to her body, but she refused to accept her thirst. To accept it would require awakening fully into the terrible necessities of Arrakis where they must guard even fractional traces of moisture, hoarding the few drops in the tent's catchpockets, begrudging a breath wasted on the open air.
    So much easier to drift back down into sleep.
    But there had been a dream in this day's sleep, and she shivered at memory of it. She had held dreaming hands beneath sandflow where a name had been written: Duke Leto Atreides. The name had blurred with the sand and she had moved to restore it, but the first letter filled before the last was begun. 
    The sand would not stop.
    Her dream became wailing: louder and louder. That ridiculous wailing--part of her mind had realized the sound was her own voice as a tiny child, little more than a baby. A woman not quite visible to memory was going away.
    My unknown mother, Jessica thought. The Bene Gesserit who bore me and gave me to the Sisters because that's what she was commanded to do. Was she glad to rid herself of a Harkonnen child?
    "The place to hit them is in the spice," Paul said. 
    How can he think of attack at a time like this? she asked herself.
    "An entire planet full of spice," she said. "How can you hit them there?"
    She heard him stirring, the sound of their pack being dragged across the tent floor.
    "It was sea power and air power on Caladan," he said. "Here, it's desert power. The Fremen are the key."
    His voice came from the vicinity of the tent's sphincter. Her Bene Gesserit training sensed in his tone an unresolved bitterness toward her.
    All his life he has been trained to hate Harkonnens, she thought. Now, he finds he is Harkonnen . . . because of me. How little he knows me! I was my Duke's only woman. I accepted his life and his values even to defying my Bene Gesserit orders.
    The tent's glowtab came alight under Paul's hand, filled the domed area with green radiance. Paul crouched at the sphincter, his stillsuit hood adjusted for the open desert--forehead capped, mouth filter in place, nose plugs adjusted. Only his dark eyes were visible: a narrow band of face that turned once toward her and away.
    "Secure yourself for the open," he said, and his voice was blurred behind the filter.
    Jessica pulled the filter across her mouth, began adjusting her hood as she watched Paul break the tent seal.
    Sand rasped as he opened the sphincter and a burred fizzle of grains ran into the tent before he could immobilize it with a static compaction tool. A hole grew in the sandwall as the tool realigned the grains. He slipped out and her ears followed his progress to the surface.
    What will we find out there? she wondered. Harkonnen troops and the Sardaukar, those are dangers we can expect. But what of the dangers we don't know?
    She thought of the compaction tool and the other strange instruments in the pack. Each of these tools suddenly stood in her mind as a sign of mysterious dangers.
    She felt then a hot breeze from surface sand touch her cheeks where they were exposed above the filter.
    "Pass up the pack." It was Paul's voice, low and guarded.
    She moved to obey, heard the water literjons gurgle as she shoved the pack across the floor. She peered upward, saw Paul framed against stars.
    "Here," he said and reached down, pulled the pack to the surface.
    Now she saw only the circle of stars. They were like the luminous tips of weapons aimed down at her. A shower of meteors crossed her patch of night. The meteors seemed to her like a warning, like tiger stripes, like luminous grave slats clabbering her blood. And she felt the chill of the price on their heads. 
    "Hurry up," Paul said. "I want to collapse the tent." 
    A shower of sand from the surface brushed her left hand. How much sand will the hand hold? She asked herself.
    "Shall I help you?" Paul asked. 
    "No."
    She swallowed in a dry throat, slipped into the hole, felt static-packed sand rasp under her hands. Paul reached down, took her arm. She stood beside him on a smooth patch of starlit desert, stared around. Sand almost brimmed their basin, leaving only a dim lip of surrounding rock. She probed the farther darkness with her trained senses.
    Noise of small animals. 
    Birds.
    A fall of dislodged sand and faint creature sounds within it. 
    Paul collapsing their tent, recovering it up the hole.
    Starlight displaced just enough of the night to charge each shadow with menace. She looked at patches of blackness.
    Black is a blind remembering, she thought. You listen for pack sounds, for the cries of those who hunted your ancestors in a past so ancient only your most primitive cells remember. The ears see. The nostrils see.
    Presently, Paul stood beside her, said: "Duncan told me that if he was captured, he could hold out . . . this long. We must leave here now." He shouldered the pack, crossed to the shallow lip of the basin, climbed to a ledge that looked down on open desert.
    Jessica followed automatically, noting how she now lived in her son's orbit.
    For now is my grief heavier than the sands of the seas, she thought. This world has emptied me of all but the oldest purpose: tomorrow's life. I live now for my young Duke and the daughter yet to be.
    She felt the sand drag her feet as she climbed to Paul's side.
    He looked north across a line of rocks, studying a distant escarpment.
    The faraway rock profile was like an ancient battleship of the seas outlined by stars. The long swish of it lifted on an invisible wave with syllables of boomerang antennae, funnels arcing back, a pi-shaped upthrusting at the stern.
    An orange glare burst above the silhouette and a line of brilliant purple cut downward toward the glare. 
    Another line of purple!
    And another upthrusting orange glare!
    It was like an ancient naval battle, remembered shellfire, and the sight held them staring.
    "Pillars of fire," Paul whispered.
    A ring of red eyes lifted over the distant rock. Lines of purple laced the sky.
    "Jetflares and lasguns," Jessica said.
    The dust-reddened first moon of Arrakis lifted above the horizon to their left and they saw a storm trail there--a ribbon of movement over the desert.
    "It must be Harkonnen 'thopters hunting us," Paul said. "The way they're cutting up the desert . . . it's as though they were making certain they stamped out whatever's there . . . the way you'd stamp out a nest of insects." 
    "Or a nest of Atreides," Jessica said.
    "We must seek cover," Paul said. "We'll head south and keep to the rocks. If they caught us in the open . . ." He turned, adjusting the pack to his shoulders. "They're killing anything that moves."
    He took one step along the ledge and, in that instant, heard the low hiss of gliding aircraft, saw the dark shapes of ornithopters above them.

= = = = = =

My father once told me that respect for the truth comes close to being the basis for all morality. "Something cannot emerge from nothing," he said. This is profound thinking if you understand how unstable "the truth" can be.
-from "Conversations with Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    "I've always prided myself on seeing things the way they truly are," Thufir Hawat said. "That's the curse of being a Mentat. You can't stop analyzing your data."
    The leathered old face appeared composed in the predawn dimness as he spoke. His sapho-stained lips were drawn into a straight line with radial creases spreading upward.
    A robed man squatted silently on sand across from Hawat, apparently unmoved by the words.
    The two crouched beneath a rock overhang that looked down on a wide, shallow sink. Dawn was spreading over the shattered outline of cliffs across the basin, touching everything with pink. It was cold under the overhang, a dry and penetrating chill left over from the night. There had been a warm wind just before dawn, but now it was cold. Hawat could hear teeth chattering behind him among the few troopers remaining in his force.
    The man squatting across from Hawat was a Fremen who had come across the sink in the first light of false dawn, skittering over the sand, blending into the dunes, his movements barely discernible.
    The Fremen extended a finger to the sand between them, drew a figure there. It looked like a bowl with an arrow spilling out of it. "There are many Harkonnen patrols," he said. He lifted his finger, pointed upward across the cliffs that Hawat and his men had descended.
    Hawat nodded. 
    Many patrols. Yes.
    But still he did not know what this Fremen wanted and this rankled. Mentat training was supposed to give a man the power to see motives.
    This had been the worst night of Hawat's life. He had been at Tsimpo, a garrison village, buffer outpost for the former capital city, Carthag, when the reports of attack began arriving. At first, he'd thought: It's a raid. The Harkonnens are testing. 
    But report followed report--faster and faster. 
    Two legions landed at Carthag.
    Five legions--fifty brigades! --attacking the Duke's main base at Arrakeen.
    A legion at Arsunt.
    Two battle groups at Splintered Rock.
    Then the reports became more detailed--there were Imperial Sardaukar among the attackers--possibly two legions of them. And it became clear that the invaders knew precisely which weight of arms to send where. Precisely! Superb Intelligence.
    Hawat's shocked fury had mounted until it threatened the smooth functioning of his Mentat capabilities. The size of the attack struck his mind like a physical blow.
    Now, hiding beneath a bit of desert rock, he nodded to himself, pulled his torn and slashed tunic around him as though warding off the cold shadows.
    The size of the attack.
    He had always expected their enemy to hire an occasional lighter from the Guild for probing raids. That was an ordinary enough gambit in this kind of House-to-House warfare. Lighters landed and took off on Arrakis regularly to transport the spice for House Atreides. Hawat had taken precautions against random raids by false spice lighters. For a full attack they'd expected no more than ten brigades.
    But there were more than two thousand ships down on Arrakis at the last count--not just lighters, but frigates, scouts, monitors, crushers, troop-carriers, dump-boxes . . . 
    More than a hundred brigades--ten legions!
    The entire spice income of Arrakis for fifty years might just cover the cost of such a venture. 
    It might.
    I underestimated what the Baron was willing to spend in attacking us, Hawat thought. I failed my Duke. 
    Then there was the matter of the traitor.
    I will live long enough to see her strangled! he thought. I should've killed that Bene Gesserit witch when I had the chance. There was no doubt in his mind who had betrayed them--the Lady Jessica. She fitted all the facts available.
    "Your man Gurney Halleck and part of his force are safe with our smuggler friends," the Fremen said. 
    "Good." 
    So Gurney will get off this hell planet. We 're not all gone.
    Hawat glanced back at the huddle of his men. He had started the night just past with three hundred of his finest. Of those, an even twenty remained and half of them were wounded. Some of them slept now, standing up, leaning against the rock, sprawled on the sand beneath the rock. Their last 'thopter, the one they'd been using as a ground-effect machine to carry their wounded, had given out just before dawn. They had cut it up with lasguns and hidden the pieces, then worked their way down into this hiding place at the edge of the basin.
    Hawat had only a rough idea of their location--some two hundred kilometers southeast of Arrakeen. The main traveled ways between the Shield Wall sietch communities were somewhere south of them.
    The Fremen across from Hawat threw back his hood and stillsuit cap to reveal sandy hair and beard. The hair was combed straight back from a high, thin forehead. He had the unreadable total blue eyes of the spice diet. Beard and mustache were stained at one side of the mouth, his hair matted there by pressure of the looping catchtube from his nose plugs.
    The man removed his plugs, readjusted them. He rubbed at a scar beside his nose.
    "If you cross the sink here this night," the Fremen said, "you must not use shields. There is a break in the wall . . . " He turned on his heels, pointed south. " . . . there, and it is open sand down to the erg. Shields will attract a . . . " He hesitated. ". . . worm. They don't often come in here, but a shield will bring one every time." 
    He said worm, Hawat thought. He was going to say something else. What? And what does he want of us? 
    Hawat sighed.
    He could not recall ever before being this tired. It was a muscle weariness that energy pills were unable to ease. 
    Those damnable Sardaukar!
    With a self-accusing bitterness, he faced the thought of the soldier-fanatics and the Imperial treachery they represented. His own Mentat assessment of the data told him how little chance he had ever to present evidence of this treachery before the High Council of the Landsraad where justice might be done.
    "Do you wish to go to the smugglers?" the Fremen asked. 
    "Is it possible?" 
    "The way is long." 
    "Fremen don't like to say no," Idaho had told him once.
    Hawat said: "You haven't yet told me whether your people can help my wounded." 
    "They are wounded." 
    The same damned answer every time!
    "We know they're wounded!" Hawat snapped. "That's not the--"
    "Peace, friend," the Fremen cautioned. "What do your wounded say? Are there those among them who can see the water need of your tribe?" 
    "We haven't talked about water," Hawat said. "We--" 
    "I can understand your reluctance," the Fremen said. "They are your friends, your tribesmen. Do you have water?" 
    "Not enough."
    The Fremen gestured to Hawat's tunic, the skin exposed beneath it. "You were caught in-sietch, without your suits. You must make a water decision, friend." 
    "Can we hire your help?"
    The Fremen shrugged. "You have no water." He glanced at the group behind Hawat. "How many of your wounded would you spend?"
    Hawat fell silent, staring at the man. He could see as a Mentat that their communication was out of phase. Word-sounds were not being linked up here in the normal manner.
    "I am Thufir Hawat," he said. "I can speak for my Duke. I will make promissory commitment now for your help. I wish a limited form of help, preserving my force long enough only to kill a traitor who thinks herself beyond vengeance." 
    "You wish our siding in a vendetta?"
    "The vendetta I'll handle myself. I wish to be freed of responsibility for my wounded that I may get about it." 
    The Fremen scowled. "How can you be responsible for your wounded? They are their own responsibility. The water's at issue, Thufir Hawat. Would you have me take that decision away from you?" 
    The man put a hand to a weapon concealed beneath his robe. 
    Hawat tensed, wondering: Is there betrayal here? 
    "What do you fear?" the Fremen demanded.
    These people and their disconcerting directness! Hawat spoke cautiously. "There's a price on my head."
    "Ah-h-h-h." The Fremen removed his hand from his weapon. "You think we have the Byzantine corruption. You don't know us. The Harkonnens have not water enough to buy the smallest child among us."
    But they had the price of Guild passage for more than two thousand fighting ships, Hawat thought. And the size of that price still staggered him.
    "We both fight Harkonnens," Hawat said. "Should we not share the problems and ways of meeting the battle issue?" 
    "We are sharing," the Fremen said. "I have seen you fight Harkonnens. You are good. There've been times I'd have appreciated your arm beside me." 
    "Say where my arm may help you," Hawat said.
    "Who knows?" the Fremen asked. "There are Harkonnen forces everywhere. But you still have not made the water decision or put it to your wounded."
    I must be cautious, Hawat told himself. There's a thing here that's not understood.
    He said: "Will you show me your way, the Arrakeen way?" 
    "Stranger-thinking," the Fremen said, and there was a sneer in his tone. He pointed to the northwest across the clifftop. "We watched you come across the sand last night." He lowered his arm. "You keep your force on the slip-face of the dunes. Bad. You have no stillsuits, no water. You will not last long." 
    "The ways of Arrakis don't come easily," Hawat said. 
    "Truth. But we've killed Harkonnens." 
    "What do you do with your own wounded? "Hawat demanded.
    "Does a man not know when he is worth saving?" the Fremen asked. "Your wounded know you have no water." He tilted his head, looking sideways up at Hawat. "This is clearly a time for water decision. Both wounded and unwounded must look to the tribe's future."
    The tribe's future, Hawat thought. The tribe of Atreides. There's sense in that. He forced himself to the question he had been avoiding.
    "Have you word of my Duke or his son?" 
    Unreadable blue eyes stared upward into Hawat's. "Word?" 
    "Their fate!" Hawat snapped.
    "Fate is the same for everyone," the Fremen said. "Your Duke, it is said, has met his fate. As to the Lisan al-Gaib, his son, that is in Liet's hands. Liet has not said." 
    I knew the answer without asking, Hawat thought.
    He glanced back at his men. They were all awake now. They had heard. They were staring out across the sand, the realization in their expressions: there was no returning to Caladan for them, and now Arrakis was lost.
    Hawat turned back to the Fremen. "Have you heard of Duncan Idaho?"
    "He was in the great house when the shield went down," the Fremen said. "This I've heard . . . no more."
    She dropped the shield and let in the Harkonnens, he thought. I was the one who sat with my back to a door. How could she do this when it meant turning also against her own son? But . . . who knows how a Bene Gesserit witch thinks . . . if you can call it thinking?
    Hawat tried to swallow in a dry throat. "When will you hear about the boy?"
    "We know little of what happens in Arrakeen," the Fremen said. He shrugged. "Who knows?" 
    "You have ways of finding out?"
    "Perhaps." The Fremen rubbed at the scar beside his nose. "Tell me, Thufir Hawat, do you have knowledge of the big weapons the Harkonnens used?"
    The artillery, Hawat thought bitterly. Who could have guessed they'd use artillery in this day of shields?
    "You refer to the artillery they used to trap our people in the caves," he said. "I've . . . theoretical knowledge of such explosive weapons."
    "Any man who retreats into a cave which has only one opening deserves to die," the Fremen said.
    "Why do you ask about these weapons?" 
    "Liet wishes it."
    Is that what he wants from us? Hawat wondered. He said: "Did you come here seeking information about the big guns?" 
    "Liet wished to see one of the weapons for himself." 
    "Then you should just go take one," Hawat sneered.
    "Yes," the Fremen said. "We took one. We have it hidden where Stilgar can study it for Liet and where Liet can see it for himself if he wishes. But I doubt he'll want to: the weapon is not a very good one. Poor design for Arrakis." 
    "You . . . took one?" Hawat asked.
    "It was a good fight," the Fremen said. "We lost only two men and spilled the water from more than a hundred of theirs." 
    There were Sardaukar at every gun, Hawat thought. This desert madman speaks casually of losing only two men against Sardaukar!
    "We would not have lost the two except for those others fighting beside the Harkonnens," the Fremen said. "Some of those are good fighters."
    One of Hawat's men limped forward, looked down at the squatting Fremen. "Are you talking about Sardaukar?" 
    "He's talking about Sardaukar," Hawat said.
    "Sardaukar!" the Fremen said, and there appeared to be glee in his voice. "Ah-h-h, so that's what they are! This was a good night indeed. Sardaukar. Which legion? Do you know?" 
    "We . . . don't know," Hawat said.
    "Sardaukar," the Fremen mused. "Yet they wear Harkonnen clothing. Is that not strange?"
    "The Emperor does not wish it known he fights against a Great House," Hawat said.
    "But you know they are Sardaukar." 
    "Who am I?" Hawat asked bitterly.
    "You are Thufir Hawat," the man said matter-of-factly. "Well, we would have learned it in time. We've sent three of them captive to be questioned by Liet's men."
    Hawat's aide spoke slowly, disbelief in every word: "You . . . captured Sardaukar?" 
    "Only three of them," the Fremen said. "They fought well." 
    If only we'd had the time to link up with these Fremen, Hawat thought. It was a sour lament in his mind. If only we could've trained them and armed them. Great Mother, what a fighting force we'd have had!
    "Perhaps you delay because of worry over the Lisan al-Gaib," the Fremen said. "If he is truly the Lisan al-Gaib, harm cannot touch him. Do not spend thoughts on a matter which has not been proved."
    "I serve the . . . Lisan al-Gaib," Hawat said. "His welfare is my concern. I've pledged myself to this." 
    "You are pledged to his water?"
    Hawat glanced at his aide, who was still staring at the Fremen, returned his attention to the squatting figure. "To his water, yes." 
    "You wish to return to Arrakeen, to the place of his water?" 
    "To . . . yes, to the place of his water."
    "Why did you not say at first it was a water matter?" The Fremen stood up, seated his nose plugs firmly.
    Hawat motioned with his head for his aide to return to the others. With a tired shrug, the man obeyed. Hawat heard a low-voiced conversation arise among the men.
    The Fremen said: "There is always a way to water." 
    Behind Hawat, a man cursed. Hawat's aide called: "Thufir! Arkie just died."
    The Fremen put a fist to his ear. "The bond of water! It's a sign!" He stared at Hawat. "We have a place nearby for accepting the water. Shall I call my men?"
    The aide returned to Hawat's side, said: "Thufir, a couple of the men left wives in Arrakeen. They're . . . well, you know how it is at a time like this."
    The Fremen still held his fist to his ear. "Is it the bond of water, Thufir Hawat?" he demanded.
    Hawat's mind was racing. He sensed now the direction of the Fremen's words, but feared the reaction of the tired men under the rock overhang when they understood it. 
    "The bond of water," Hawat said.
    "Let our tribes be joined," the Fremen said, and he lowered his fist.
    As though that were the signal, four men slid and dropped down from the rocks above them. They darted back under the overhang, rolled the dead man in a loose robe, lifted him and began running with him along the cliff wall to the right. Spurts of dust lifted around their running feet.
    It was over before Hawat's tired men could gather their wits. The group with the body hanging like a sack in its enfolding robe was gone around a turn in the cliff.
    One of Hawat's men shouted: "Where they going with Arkie? He was--" 
    "They're taking him to . . . bury him," Hawat said. 
    "Fremen don't bury their dead!" the man barked. "Don't you try any tricks on us, Thufir. We know what they do. Arkie was one of--"
    "Paradise were sure for a man who died in the service of Lisan al-Gaib," the Fremen said. "If it is the Lisan al-Gaib you serve, as you have said it, why raise mourning cries? The memory of one who died in this fashion will live as long as the memory of man endures."
    But Hawat's men advanced, angry looks on their faces. One had captured a lasgun. He started to draw it.
    "Stop right where you are!" Hawat barked. He fought down the sick fatigue that gripped his muscles. "These people respect our dead. Customs differ, but the meaning's the same." 
    "They're going to render Arkie down for his water," the man with the lasgun snarled.
    "Is it that your men wish to attend the ceremony?" the Fremen asked.
    He doesn't even see the problem, Hawat thought. The naivete of the Fremen was frightening.
    "They're concerned for a respected comrade," Hawat said.
    "We will treat your comrade with the same reverence we treat our own," the Fremen said. "This is the bond of water. We know the rites. A man's flesh is his own; the water belongs to the tribe." 
    Hawat spoke quickly as the man with the lasgun advanced another step. "Will you now help our wounded?" 
    "One does not question the bond," the Fremen said. "We will do for you what a tribe does for its own. First, we must get all of you suited and see to the necessities." 
    The man with the lasgun hesitated.
    Hawat's aide said: "Are we buying help with Arkie's . . . water?" 
    "Not buying," Hawat said. "We've joined these people." 
    "Customs differ," one of his men muttered. 
    Hawat began to relax.
    "And they'll help us get to Arrakeen?"
    "We will kill Harkonnens," the Fremen said. He grinned. "And Sardaukar." He stepped backward, cupped his hands beside his ears and tipped his head back, listening. Presently, he lowered his hands, said: "An aircraft comes. Conceal yourselves beneath the rock and remain' motionless." 
    At a gesture from Hawat, his men obeyed.
    The Fremen took Hawat's arm, pressed him back with the others. "We will fight in the time of fighting," the man said. He reached beneath his robes, brought out a small cage, lifted a creature from it.
    Hawat recognized a tiny bat. The bat turned its head and Hawat saw its blue-within-blue eyes.
    The Fremen stroked the bat, soothing it, crooning to it. He bent over the animal's head, allowed a drop of saliva to fall from his tongue into the bat's upturned mouth. The bat stretched its wings, but remained on the Fremen's opened hand. The man took a tiny tube, held it beside the bat's head and chattered into the tube; then, lifting the creature high, he threw it upward.
    The bat swooped away beside the cliff and was lost to sight.
    The Fremen folded the cage, thrust it beneath his robe. Again, he bent his head, listening. "They quarter the high country," he said. "One wonders who they seek up there." 
    "It's known that we retreated in this direction," Hawat said.
    "One should never presume one is the sole object of a hunt," the Fremen said. "Watch the other side of the basin. You will see a thing." 
    Time passed.
    Some of Hawat's men stirred, whispering.
    "Remain silent as frightened animals," the Fremen hissed.
    Hawat discerned movement near the opposite cliff--flitting blurs of tan on tan.
    "My little friend carried his message," the Fremen said. "He is a good messenger--day or night. I'll be unhappy to lose that one." 
    The movement across the sink faded away. On the entire four to five kilometer expanse of sand nothing remained but the growing pressure of the day's heat--blurred columns of rising air. 
    "Be most silent now," the Fremen whispered.
    A file of plodding figures emerged from a break in the opposite cliff, headed directly across the sink. To Hawat, they appeared to be Fremen, but a curiously inept band. He counted six men making heavy going of it over the dunes.
    A "thwok-thwok" of ornithopter wings sounded high to the right behind Hawat's group. The craft came over the cliff wall above them--an Atreides 'thopter with Harkonnen battle colors splashed on it. The 'thopter swooped toward the men crossing the sink. 
    The group there stopped on a dune crest, waved.
    The 'thopter circled once over them in a tight curve, came back for a dust-shrouded landing in front of the Fremen. Five men swarmed from the 'thopter and Hawat saw the dust-repellent shimmering of shields and, in their motions, the hard competence of Sardaukar.
    "Aiihh! They use their stupid shields," the Fremen beside Hawat hissed. He glanced toward the open south wall of the sink.
    "They are Sardaukar," Hawat whispered. 
    "Good."
    The Sardaukar approached the waiting group of Fremen in an enclosing half-circle. Sun glinted on blades held ready. The Fremen stood in a compact group, apparently indifferent.
    Abruptly, the sand around the two groups sprouted Fremen. They were at the ornithopter, then in it. Where the two groups had met at the dune crest, a dust cloud partly obscured violent motion. 
    Presently, dust settled. Only Fremen remained standing.
    "They left only three men in their 'thopter," the Fremen beside Hawat said. "That was fortunate. I don't believe we had to damage the craft in taking it."
    Behind Hawat, one of his men whispered: "Those were Sardaukar!" 
    "Did you notice how well they fought?" the Fremen asked.
    Hawat took a deep breath. He smelled the burned dust around him, felt the heat, the dryness. In a voice to match that dryness, he said: "Yes, they fought well, indeed."
    The captured 'thopter took off with a lurching flap of wings, angled upward to the south in a steep, wing-tucked climb. 
    So these Fremen can handle 'thopters, too, Hawat thought.
    On the distant dune, a Fremen waved a square of green cloth: once . . . twice.
    "More come!" the Fremen beside Hawat barked. "Be ready. I'd hoped to have us away without more inconvenience." 
    Inconvenience! Hawat thought.
    He saw two more 'thopters swooping from high in the west onto an area of sand suddenly devoid of visible Fremen. Only eight splotches of blue--the bodies of the Sardaukar in Harkonnen uniforms--remained at the scene of violence.
    Another 'thopter glided in over the cliff wall above Hawat. He drew in a sharp breath as he saw it--a big troop carrier. It flew with the slow, spread-wing heaviness of a full load--like a giant bird coming to its nest.
    In the distance, the purple finger of a lasgun beam flicked from one of the diving 'thopters. It laced across the sand, raising a sharp trail of dust.
    "The cowards!" the Fremen beside Hawat rasped.
    The troop carrier settled toward the patch of blue-clad bodies. Its wings crept out to full reach, began the cupping action of a quick stop.
    Hawat's attention was caught by a flash of sun on metal to the south, a 'thopter plummeting there in a power dive, wings folded flat against its sides, its jets a golden flare against the dark silvered gray of the sky. It plunged like an arrow toward the troop carrier which was unshielded because of the lasgun activity around it. Straight into the carrier the diving 'thopter plunged.
    A flaming roar shook the basin. Rocks tumbled from the cliff walls all around. A geyser of red-orange shot skyward from the sand where the carrier and its companion 'thopters had been--everything there caught in the flame.
    It was the Fremen who took off in that captured 'thopter, Hawat thought. He deliberately sacrificed himself to get that carrier. Great Mother! What are these Fremen?
    "A reasonable exchange," said the Fremen beside Hawat. "There must've been three hundred men in that carrier. Now, we must see to their water and make plans to get another aircraft." He started to step out of their rock-shadowed concealment.
    A rain of blue uniforms came over the cliff wall in front of him, falling in low-suspensor slowness. In the flashing instant, Hawat had time to see that they were Sardaukar, hard faces set in battle frenzy, that they were unshielded and each carried a knife in one hand, a stunner in the other.
    A thrown knife caught Hawat's Fremen companion in the throat, hurting him backward, twisting face down. Hawat had only time to draw his own knife before blackness of a stunner projectile felled him.

= = = = = =

Muad'Dib could indeed, see the Future, but you must understand the limits of this power. Think of sight. You have eyes, yet cannot see without light. If you are on the floor of a valley, you cannot see beyond your valley. Just so, Muad'Dib could not always choose to look across the mysterious terrain. He tells us that a single obscure decision of prophecy, perhaps the choice of one word over another, could change the entire aspect of the future. He tells us "The vision of time is broad, but when you pass through it, time becomes a narrow door." And always, he fought the temptation to choose a clear, safe course, warning "That path leads ever down into stagnation."
-from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    As the ornithopters glided out of the night above them, Paul grabbed his mother's arm, snapped: "Don't move!" 
    Then he saw the lead craft in the moonlight, the way its wings cupped to brake for landing, the reckless dash of the hands at the controls.
    "It's Idaho," he breathed.
    The craft and its companions settled into the basin like a covey of birds coming to nest. Idaho was out of his 'thopter and running toward them before the dust settled. Two figures in Fremen robes followed him. Paul recognized one: the tall, sandy-bearded Kynes. 
    "This way!" Kynes called and he veered left.
    Behind Kynes, other Fremen were throwing fabric covers over their ornithopters. The craft became a row of shallow dunes.
    Idaho skidded to a stop in front of Paul, saluted. "M'Lord, the Fremen have a temporary hiding place nearby where we--" 
    "What about that back there?"
    Paul pointed to the violence above the distant cliff--the jetflares, the purple beams of lasguns lacing the desert.
    A rare smile touched Idaho's round, placid face. "M'Lord . . . Sire, I've left them a little sur--"
    Glaring white light filled the desert--bright as a sun, etching their shadows onto the rock floor of the ledge. In one sweeping motion, Idaho had Paul's arm in one hand, Jessica's shoulder in the other, hurling them down off the ledge into the basin. They sprawled together in the sand as the roar of an explosion thundered over them. Its shock wave tumbled chips off the rock ledge they had vacated. 
    Idaho sat up, brushed sand from himself.
    "Not the family atomics!" Jessica said. "I thought--" 
    "You planted a shield back there," Paul said.
    "A big one turned to full force," Idaho said. "A lasgun beam touched it and . . . " He shrugged.
    "Subatomic fusion," Jessica said. "That's a dangerous weapon."
    "Not weapon, m'Lady, defense. That scum will think twice before using lasguns another time."
    The Fremen from the ornithopters stopped above them. One called in a low voice: "We should get under cover, friends." 
    Paul got to his feet as Idaho helped Jessica up. 
    "That blast will attract considerable attention, Sire," Idaho said. 
    Sire, Paul thought.
    The word had such a strange sound when directed at him. Sire had always been his father.
    He felt himself touched briefly by his powers of prescience, seeing himself infected by the wild race consciousness that was moving the human universe toward chaos. The vision left him shaken, and he allowed Idaho to guide him along the edge of the basin to a rock projection. Fremen there were opening a way down into the sand with their compaction tools. 
    "May I take your pack, Sire?" Idaho asked. 
    "It's not heavy, Duncan," Paul said.
    "You have no body shield," Idaho said. "Do you wish mine?" He glanced at the distant cliff. "Not likely there'll be any more lasgun activity about."
    "Keep your shield, Duncan. Your right arm is shield enough for me."
    Jessica saw the way the praise took effect, how Idaho moved closer to Paul, and she thought: Such a sure hand my son has with his people.
    The Fremen removed a rock plug that opened a passage down into the native basement complex of the desert. A camouflage cover was rigged for the opening.
    "This way," one of the Fremen said, and he led them down rock steps into darkness.
    Behind them, the cover blotted out the moonlight. A dim green glow came alive ahead, revealing the steps and rock walls, a turn to the left. Robed Fremen were all around them now, pressing downward. They rounded the corner, found another down-slanting passage. It opened into a rough cave chamber.
    Kynes stood before them, jubba hood thrown back. The neck of his stillsuit glistening in the green light. His long hair and beard were mussed. The blue eyes without whites were a darkness under heavy brows.
    In the moment of encounter, Kynes wondered at himself: Why am I helping these people? It's the most dangerous thing I've ever done. It could doom me with them.
    Then he looked squarely at Paul, seeing the boy who had taken on the mantle of manhood, masking grief, suppressing all except the position that now must be assumed--the dukedom. And Kynes realized in that moment the dukedom still existed and solely because of this youth--and this was not a thing to be taken lightly.
    Jessica glanced once around the chamber, registering it on her senses in the Bene Gesserit way--a laboratory, a civil place full of angles and squares in the ancient manner.
    "This is one of the Imperial Ecological Testing Stations my father wanted as advance bases," Paul said.
    His father wanted! Kynes thought.
    And again Kynes wondered at himself. Am I foolish to aid these fugitives? Why am I doing it? It'd be so easy to take them now, to buy the Harkonnen trust with them.
    Paul followed his mother's example, gestalting the room, seeing the workbench down one side, the walls of featureless rock. Instruments lined the bench--dials glowing, wire gridex planes with fluting glass emerging from them. An ozone smell permeated the place.
    Some of the Fremen moved on around a concealing angle in the chamber and new sounds started there--machine coughs, the whinnies of spinning belts and multidrives.
    Paul looked to the end of the room, saw cages with small animals in them stacked against the wall.
    "You've recognized this place correctly," Kynes said. "For what would you use such a place, Paul Atreides?" 
    "To make this planet a fit place for humans," Paul said. 
    Perhaps that's why I help them, Kynes thought.
    The machine sounds abruptly hummed away to silence. Into this void there came a thin animal squeak from the cages. It was cut off abruptly as though in embarrassment.
    Paul returned his attention to the cages, saw that the animals were brown-winged bats. An automatic feeder extended from the side wall across the cages.
    A Fremen emerged from the hidden area of the chamber, spoke to Kynes: "Liet, the field-generator equipment is not working. I am unable to mask us from proximity detectors." 
    "Can you repair it?" Kynes asked.
    "Not quickly. The parts . . . " The man shrugged.
    "Yes," Kynes said. "Then we'll do without machinery. Get a hand pump for air out to the surface." 
    "Immediately." The man hurried away.
    Kynes turned back to Paul. "You gave a good answer." 
    Jessica marked the easy rumble of the man's voice. It was a royal voice, accustomed to command. And she had not missed the reference to him as Liet. Liet was the Fremen alter ego, the other face of the tame planetologist.
    "We're most grateful for your help, Doctor Kynes," she said.
    "Mm-m-m, we'll see," Kynes said. He nodded to one of his men. "Spice coffee in my quarters, Shamir." 
    "At once, Liet," the man said.
    Kynes indicated an arched opening in the side wall of the chamber. "If you please?"
    Jessica allowed herself a regal nod before accepting. She saw Paul give a hand signal to Idaho, telling him to mount guard here.
    The passage, two paces deep, opened through a heavy door into a square office lighted by golden glowglobes. Jessica passed her hand across the door as she entered, was startled to identify plasteel.
    Paul stepped three paces into the room, dropped his pack to the floor. He heard the door close behind him, studied the place--about eight meters to a side, walls of natural rock, curry-colored, broken by metal filing cabinets on their right. A low desk with milk glass top shot full of yellow bubbles occupied the room's center. Four suspensor chairs ringed the desk.
    Kynes moved around Paul, held a chair for Jessica. She sat down, noting the way her son examined the room.
    Paul remained standing for another eyeblink. A faint anomaly in the room's air currents told him there was a secret exit to their right behind the filing cabinets.
    "Will you sit down, Paul Atreides?" Kynes asked.
    How carefully he avoids my title, Paul thought. But he accepted the chair, remained silent while Kynes sat down.
    "You sense that Arrakis could be a paradise," Kynes said. "Yet, as you see, the Imperium sends here only its trained hatchetmen, its seekers after the spice!"
    Paul held up his thumb with its ducal signet. "Do you see this ring?" 
    "Yes." 
    "Do you know its significance?" 
    Jessica turned sharply to stare at her son.
    "Your father lies dead in the ruins of Arrakeen," Kynes said. "You are technically the Duke."
    "I'm a soldier of the Imperium," Paul said, "technically a hatchetman."
    Kynes face darkened. "Even with the Emperor's Sardaukar standing over your father's body?"
    "The Sardaukar are one thing, the legal source of my authority is another," Paul said.
    "Arrakis has its own way of determining who wears the mantle of authority," Kynes said.
    And Jessica, turning back to look at him, thought: There's steel in this man that no one has taken the temper out of . . . and we've need of steel. Paul's doing a dangerous thing.
    Paul said: "The Sardaukar on Arrakis are a measure of how much our beloved Emperor feared my father. Now, I will give the Padishah Emperor reasons to fear the--"
    "Lad," Kynes said, "there are things you don't--"
    "You will address me as Sire or my Lord," Paul said. 
    Gently, Jessica thought.
    Kynes stared at Paul, and Jessica noted the glint of admiration in the planetologist's face, the touch of humor there. 
    "Sire," Kynes said.
    "I am an embarrassment to the Emperor," Paul said. "I am an embarrassment to all who would divide Arrakis as their spoil. As I live, I shall continue to be such an embarrassment that I stick in their throats and choke them to death!" 
    "Words," Kynes said.
    Paul stared at him. Presently, Paul said: "You have a legend of the Lisan al-Gaib here, the Voice from the Outer World, the one who will lead the Fremen to paradise. Your men have--" 
    "Superstition!" Kynes said.
    "Perhaps, "Paul agreed. "Yet perhaps not. Superstitions sometimes have strange roots and stranger branchings." 
    "You have a plan," Kynes said. "This much is obvious . . . Sire."
    "Could your Fremen provide me with proof positive that the Sardaukar are here in Harkonnen uniform?" 
    "Quite likely."
    "The Emperor will put a Harkonnen back in power here," Paul said. "Perhaps even Beast Rabban. Let him. Once he has involved himself beyond escaping his guilt, let the Emperor face the possibility of a Bill of Particulars laid before the Landsraad. Let him answer there where--" 
    "Paul!" Jessica said.
    "Granted that the Landsraad High Council accepts your case," Kynes said, "there could be only one outcome: general warfare between the Imperium and the Great Houses." 
    "Chaos," Jessica said.
    "But I'd present my case to the Emperor," Paul said, "and give him an alternative to chaos." 
    Jessica spoke in a dry tone: "Blackmail?"
    "One of the tools of statecraft, as you've said yourself," Paul said, and Jessica heard the bitterness in his voice. "The Emperor has no sons, only daughters." 
    "You'd aim for the throne?" Jessica asked.
    "The Emperor will not risk having the Imperium shattered by total war," Paul said. "Planets blasted, disorder everywhere--he'll not risk that." 
    "This is a desperate gamble you propose," Kynes said. 
    "What do the Great Houses of the Landsraad fear most?" Paul asked. "They fear most what is happening here right now on Arrakis--the Sardaukar picking them off one by one. That's why there is a Landsraad. This is the glue of the Great Convention. Only in union do they match the Imperial forces." 
    "But they're--"
    "This is what they fear," Paul said. "Arrakis would become a rallying cry. Each of them would see himself in my father--cut out of the herd and killed." 
    Kynes spoke to Jessica: "Would his plan work?" 
    "I'm no Mentat," Jessica said. 
    "But you are Bene Gesserit."
    She shot a probing stare at him, said: "His plan has good points and bad points . . . as any plan would at this stage. A plan depends as much upon execution as it does upon concept." 
    " 'Law is the ultimate science,' " Paul quoted. "Thus it reads above the Emperor's door. I propose to show him law." 
    "And I'm not sure I could trust the person who conceived this plan," Kynes said. "Arrakis has its own plan that we--" 
    "From the throne," Paul said, "I could make a paradise of Arrakis with the wave of a hand. This is the coin I offer for your support." 
    Kynes stiffened. "My loyalty's not for sale, Sire." 
    Paul stared across the desk at him, meeting the cold glare of those blue-within-blue eyes, studying the bearded face, the commanding appearance. A harsh smile touched Paul's lips and he said: "Well spoken. I apologize."
    Kynes met Paul's stare and, presently, said: "No Harkonnen ever admitted error. Perhaps you're not like them, Atreides." 
    "It could be a fault in their education," Paul said. "You say you're not for sale, but I believe I've the coin you'll accept. For your loyalty I offer my loyalty to you . . . totally." 
    My son has the Atreides sincerity, Jessica thought. He has that tremendous, almost naive honor--and what a powerful force that truly is. 
    She saw that Paul's words had shaken Kynes.
    "This is nonsense," Kynes said. "You're just a boy and--" 
    "I'm the Duke," Paul said. "I'm an Atreides. No Atreides has ever broken such a bond." 
    Kynes swallowed.
    "When I say totally," Paul said, "I mean without reservation. I would give my life for you."
    "Sire!" Kynes said, and the word was torn from him, but Jessica saw that he was not now speaking to a boy of fifteen, but to a man, to a superior. Now Kynes meant the word.
    In this moment he'd give his life for Paul, she thought. How do the Atreides accomplish this thing so quickly, so easily? 
    "I know you mean this," Kynes said. "Yet the Harkon--" 
    The door behind Paul slammed open. He whirled to see reeling violence--shouting, the clash of steel, wax-image faces grimacing in the passage.
    With his mother beside him, Paul leaped for the door, seeing Idaho blocking the passage, his blood-pitted eyes there visible through a shield blur, claw hands beyond him, arcs of steel chopping futilely at the shield. There was the orange fire-mouth of a stunner repelled by the shield. Idaho's blades were through it all, flick-flicking, red dripping from them.
    Then Kynes was beside Paul and they threw their weight against the door.
    Paul had one last glimpse of Idaho standing against a swarm of Harkonnen uniforms--his jerking, controlled staggers, the black goat hair with a red blossom of death in it. Then the door was closed and there came a snick as Kynes threw the bolts. 
    "I appear to've decided," Kynes said.
    "Someone detected your machinery before it was shut down," Paul said. He pulled his mother away from the door, met the despair in her eyes.
    "I should've suspected trouble when the coffee failed to arrive," Kynes said.
    "You've a bolt hole out of here," Paul said. "Shall we use it?" 
    Kynes took a deep breath, said: "This door should hold for at least twenty minutes against all but a lasgun."
    "They'll not use a lasgun for fear we've shields on this side," Paul said.
    "Those were Sardaukar in Harkonnen uniform," Jessica whispered.
    They could hear pounding on the door now, rhythmic blows.
    Kynes indicated the cabinets against the right-hand wall, said: "This way." He crossed to the first cabinet, opened a drawer, manipulated a handle within it. The entire wall of cabinets swung open to expose the black mouth of a tunnel. "This door also is plasteel," Kynes said.
    "You were well prepared," Jessica said.
    "We lived under the Harkonnens for eighty years," Kynes said. He herded them into the darkness, closed the door.
    In the sudden blackness, Jessica saw a luminous arrow on the floor ahead of her.
    Kynes' voice came from behind them: "We'll separate here. This wall is tougher. It'll stand for at least an hour. Follow the arrows like that one on the floor. They'll be extinguished by your passage. They lead through a maze to another exit where I've secreted a 'thopter. There's a storm across the desert tonight. Your only hope is to run for that storm, dive into the top of it, ride with it. My people have done this in stealing 'thopters. If you stay high in the storm you'll survive." 
    "What of you?" Paul asked.
    "I'll try to escape another way. If I'm captured . . . well, I'm still Imperial Planetologist. I can say I was your captive." 
    Running like cowards, Paul thought. But how else can I live to avenge my father? He turned to face the door.
    Jessica heard him move, said "Duncan's dead, Paul. You saw the wound. You can do nothing for him." 
    "I'll take full payment for them all one day," Paul said. 
    "Not unless you hurry now," Kynes said. 
    Paul felt the man's hand on his shoulder. 
    "Where will we meet, Kynes?" Paul asked.
    "I'll send Fremen searching for you. The storm's path is known. Hurry now, and the Great Mother give you speed and luck." 
    They heard him go, a scrambling in the blackness.
    Jessica found Paul's hand, pulled him gently. "We must not get separated," she said. 
    "Yes."
    He followed her across the first arrow, seeing it go black as they touched it. Another arrow beckoned ahead.
    They crossed it, saw it extinguish itself, saw another arrow ahead.
    They were running now.
    Plans within plans within plans within plans, Jessica thought. Have we become part of someone else's plan now?
    The arrows led them around turnings, past side openings only dimly sensed in the faint luminescence. Their way slanted downward for a time, then up, ever up. They came finally to steps, rounded a corner and were brought short by a glowing wall with a dark handle visible in its center. 
    Paul pressed the handle.
    The wall swung away from them. Light flared to reveal a rock-hewn cavern with an ornithopter squatting in its center. A flat gray wall with a doorsign on it loomed beyond the aircraft. 
    "Where did Kynes go?" Jessica asked.
    "He did what any good guerrilla leader would," Paul said. "He separated us into two parties and arranged that he couldn't reveal where we are if he's captured. He won't really know." 
    Paul drew her into the room, noting how their feet kicked up dust on the floor.
    "No one's been here for a long time," he said. 
    "He seemed confident the Fremen could find us," she said. 
    "I share that confidence."
    Paul released her hand, crossed to the ornithopter's left door, opened it, and secured his pack in the rear. "This ship's proximity masked," he said. "Instrument panel has remote door control, light control. Eighty years under the Harkonnens taught them to be thorough." 
    Jessica leaned against the craft's other side, catching her breath.
    "The Harkonnens will have a covering force over this area," she said. "They're not stupid." She considered her direction sense, pointed right. "The storm we saw is that way."
    Paul nodded, fighting an abrupt reluctance to move. He knew its cause, but found no help in the knowledge. Somewhere this night he had passed a decision-nexus into the deep unknown. He knew the time-area surrounding them, but the here-and-now existed as a place of mystery. It was as though he had seen himself from a distance go out of sight down into a valley. Of the countless paths up out of that valley, some might carry a Paul Atreides back into sight, but many would not.
    "The longer we wait the better prepared they'll be," Jessica said. 
    "Get in and strap yourself down," he said.
    He joined her in the ornithopter, still wrestling with the thought that this was blind ground, unseen in any prescient vision. And he realized with an abrupt sense of shock that he had been giving more and more reliance to prescient memory and it had weakened him for this particular emergency.
    "If you rely only on your eyes, your other senses weaken." It was a Bene Gesserit axiom. He took it to himself now, promising never again to fall into that trap . . . if he lived through this.
    Paul fastened his safety harness, saw that his mother was secure, checked the aircraft. The wings were at full spread-rest, their delicate metal interleavings extended. He touched the retractor bar, watched the wings shorten for jet-boost take-off the way Gurney Halleck had taught him. The starter switch moved easily. Dials on the instrument panel came alive as the jetpods were armed. Turbines began their low hissing. 
    "Ready?" he asked. 
    "Yes."
    He touched the remote control for lights. 
    Darkness blanketed them.
    His hand was a shadow against the luminous dials as he tripped the remote door control. Grating sounded ahead of them. A cascade of sand swished away to silence. A dusty breeze touched Paul's cheeks. He closed his door, feeling the sudden pressure.
    A wide patch of dust-blurred stars framed in angular darkness appeared where the door-wall had been. Starlight defined a shelf beyond, a suggestion of sand ripples.
    Paul depressed the glowing action-sequence switch on his panel. The wings snapped back and down, hurling the 'thopter out of its nest. Power surged from the jetpods as the wings locked into lift attitude.
    Jessica let her hands ride lightly on the dual controls, feeling the sureness of her son's movements. She was frightened, yet exhilarated. Now, Paul's training is our only hope, she thought. His youth and swiftness.
    Paul fed more power to the jetpods. The 'thopter banked, sinking them into their seats as a dark wall lifted against the stars ahead. He gave the craft more wing, more power. Another burst of lifting wingbeats and they came out over rocks, silver-frosted angles and outcroppings in the starlight. The dust-reddened second moon showed itself above the horizon to their right, defining the ribbon trail of the storm.
    Paul's hands danced over the controls. Wings snicked in to beetle stubs. G-force pulled at their flesh as the craft came around in a tight bank.
    "Jetflares behind us!" Jessica said. 
    "I saw them." 
    He slammed the power arm forward.
    Their 'thopter leaped like a frightened animal, surged southwest toward the storm and the great curve of desert. In the near distance, Paul saw scattered shadows telling where the line of rocks ended, the basement complex sinking beneath the dunes. Beyond stretched moonlit fingernail shadows--dunes diminishing one into another.
    And above the horizon climbed the flat immensity of the storm like a wall against the stars. 
    Something jarred the 'thopter.
    "Shellburst!" Jessica gasped. "They're using some kind of projectile weapon."
    She saw a sudden animal grin on Paul's face. "They seem to be avoiding their lasguns," he said.
    "But we've no shields!"
    "Do they know that?" 
    Again the 'thopter shuddered.
    Paul twisted to peer back. "Only one of them appears to be fast enough to keep up with us."
    He returned his attention to their course, watching the storm wall grow high in front of them. It loomed like a tangible solid.
    "Projectile launchers, rockets, all the ancient weaponry--that's one thing we'll give the Fremen," Paul whispered. 
    "The storm," Jessica said. "Hadn't you better turn?" 
    "What about the ship behind us?" 
    "He's pulling up." 
    "Now!"
    Paul stubbed the wings, banked hard left into the deceptively slow boiling of the storm wall, felt his cheeks pull in the G-force.
    They appeared to glide into a slow clouding of dust that grew heavier and heavier until it blotted out the desert and the moon. The aircraft became a long, horizontal whisper of darkness lighted only by the green luminosity of the instrument panel.
    Through Jessica's mind flashed all the warnings about such storms--that they cut metal like butter, etched flesh to bone and ate away the bones. She felt the buffeting of dust-blanketed wind. It twisted them as Paul fought the controls. She saw him chop the power, felt the ship buck. The metal around them hissed and trembled.
    "Sand!" Jessica shouted.
    She saw the negative shake of his head in the light from the panel. "Not much sand this high." 
    But she could feel them sinking deeper into the maelstrom.
    Paul sent the wings to their full soaring length, heard them creak with the strain. He kept his eyes fixed on the instruments, gliding by instinct, fighting for altitude.
    The sound of their passage diminished.
    The 'thopter began rolling off to the left. Paul focused on the glowing globe within the attitude curve, fought his craft back to level flight.
    Jessica had the eerie feeling that they were standing still, that all motion was external. A vague tan flowing against the windows, a rumbling hiss reminded her of the powers around them.
    Winds to seven or eight hundred kilometers an hour, she thought. Adrenaline edginess gnawed at her. I must not fear, she told herself, mouthing the words of the Bene Gesserit litany. Fear is the mind-killer.
    Slowly her long years of training prevailed.
    Calmness returned.
    "We have the tiger by the tail," Paul whispered. "We can't go down, can't land . . . and I don't think I can lift us out of this. We'll have to ride it out."
    Calmness drained out of her. Jessica felt her teeth chattering, clamped them together. Then she heard Paul's voice, low and controlled, reciting the litany:
    "Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past me I will turn to see fear's path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain."

= = = = = =

What do you despise? By this are you truly known.
-from "Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    "They are dead, Baron," said Iakin Nefud, the guard captain. "Both the woman and the boy are certainly dead." 
    The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen sat up in the sleep suspensors of his private quarters. Beyond these quarters and enclosing him like a multishelled egg stretched the space frigate he had grounded on Arrakis. Here in his quarters, though, the ship's harsh metal was disguised with draperies, with fabric paddings and rare art objects. 
    "It is a certainty," the guard captain said. "They are dead." 
    The Baron shifted his gross body in the suspensors, focused his attention on an ebaline statue of a leaping boy in a niche across the room. Sleep faded from him. He straightened the padded suspensor beneath the fat folds of his neck, stared across the single glowglobe of his bedchamber to the doorway where Captain Nefud stood blocked by the pentashield.
    "They're certainly dead, Baron," the man repeated.
    The Baron noted the trace of semuta dullness in Nefud's eyes. It was obvious the man had been deep within the drug's rapture when he received this report, and had stopped only to take the antidote before rushing here.
    "I have a full report," Nefud said.
    Let him sweat a little, the Baron thought. One must always keep the tools of statecraft sharp and ready. Power and fear--sharp and ready.
    "Have you seen their bodies?" the Baron rumbled. 
    Nefud hesitated. 
    "Well?"
    "M'Lord . . . they were seen to dive into a sandstorm . . . winds over eight hundred kilometers. Nothing survives such a storm, m'Lord. Nothing! One of our own craft was destroyed in the pursuit."
    The Baron stared at Nefud, noting the nervous twitch in the scissors line of the man's jaw muscles, the way the chin moved as Nefud swallowed.
    "You have seen the bodies?" the Baron asked. 
    "M'Lord--"
    "For what purpose do you come here rattling your armor?" the Baron roared. "To tell me a thing is certain when it is not? Do you think I'll praise you for such stupidity, give you another promotion?" 
    Nefud's face went bone pale.
    Look at the chicken, the Baron thought. I am surrounded by such useless clods. If I scattered sand before this creature and told him it was grain, he'd peek at it.
    "The man Idaho led us to them, then?" the Baron asked. 
    "Yes, m'Lord!"
    Look how he blurts out his answer, the Baron thought. He said: "They were attempting to flee to the Fremen, eh?" 
    "Yes, m'Lord." 
    "Is there more to this . . . report?"
    "The Imperial Planetologist, Kynes, is involved, m'Lord. Idaho joined this Kynes under mysterious circumstances . . . I might even say suspicious circumstances." 
    "So?"
    "They . . . ah, fled together to a place in the desert where it's apparent the boy and his mother were hiding. In the excitement of the chase, several of our groups were caught in a lasgun-shield explosion." 
    "How many did we lose?" 
    "I'm . . . ah, not sure yet, m'Lord." 
    He's lying, the Baron thought. It must've been pretty bad.
    "The Imperial lackey, this Kynes," the Baron said. "He was playing a double game, eh?" 
    "I'd stake my reputation on it, m'Lord." 
    His reputation!
    "Have the man killed," the Baron said.
    "M'Lord! Kynes is the Imperial Planetologist, His Majesty's own serv--" 
    "Make it look like an accident, then!"
    "M'Lord, there were Sardaukar with our forces in the subjugation of this Fremen nest. They have Kynes in custody now." 
    "Get him away from them. Say I wish to question him." 
    "If they demur?" 
    "They will not if you handle it correctly." 
    Nefud swallowed. "Yes, m'Lord."
    "The man must die," the Baron rumbled. "He tried to help my enemies." 
    Nefud shifted from one foot to the other. 
    "Well?"
    "M'Lord, the Sardaukar have . . . two persons in custody who might be of interest to you. They've caught the Duke's Master of Assassins." 
    "Hawat? Thufir Hawat?" 
    "I've seen the captive myself, m'Lord. 'Tis Hawat." 
    "I'd not've believed it possible!"
    "They say he was knocked out by a stunner, m'Lord. In the desert where he couldn't use his shield. He's virtually unharmed. If we can get our hands on him, he'll provide great sport." 
    "This is a Mentat you speak of," the Baron growled. "One doesn't waste a Mentat. Has he spoken? What does he say of his defeat? Could he know the extent of . . . but no." 
    "He has spoken only enough, m'Lord, to reveal his belief that the Lady Jessica was his betrayer." 
    "Ah-h-h-h-h."
    The Baron sank back, thinking; then: "You're sure? It's the Lady Jessica who attracts his anger?" 
    "He said it in my presence, m'Lord." 
    "Let him think she's alive, then." 
    "But, m'Lord--"
    "Be quiet. I wish Hawat treated kindly. He must be told nothing of the late Doctor Yueh, his true betrayer. Let it be said that Doctor Yueh died defending his Duke. In a way, this may even be true. We will, instead, feed his suspicions against the Lady Jessica." 
    "M'Lord, I don't--"
    "The way to control and direct a Mentat, Nefud, is through his information. False information--false results." 
    "Yes, m'Lord, but . . . "
    "Is Hawat hungry? Thirsty?" 
    "M'Lord, Hawat's still in the hands of the Sardaukar!" 
    "Yes. Indeed, yes. But the Sardaukar will be as anxious to get information from Hawat as I am. I've noticed a thing about our allies, Nefud. They're not very devious . . .politically. I do believe this is a deliberate thing; the Emperor wants it that way. Yes. I do believe it. You will remind the Sardaukar commander of my renown at obtaining information from reluctant subjects." 
    Nefud looked unhappy. "Yes, m'Lord."
    "You will tell the Sardaukar commander that I wish to question both Hawat and this Kynes at the same time, playing one off against the other. He can understand that much, I think." 
    "Yes, m'Lord." 
    "And once we have them in our hands . . . " The Baron nodded.
    "M'Lord, the Sardaukar will want an observer with you during any . . . questioning."
    "I'm sure we can produce an emergency to draw off any unwanted observers, Nefud."
    "I understand, m'Lord. That's when Kynes can have his accident."
    "Both Kynes and Hawat will have accidents then, Nefud. But only Kynes will have a real accident. It's Hawat I want. Yes. Ah, yes."
    Nefud blinked, swallowed. He appeared about to ask a question, but remained silent.
    "Hawat will be given both food and drink," the Baron said. "Treated with kindness, with sympathy. In his water you will administer the residual poison developed by the late Piter de Vries. And you will see that the antidote becomes a regular part of Hawat's diet from this point on . . . unless I say otherwise." 
    "The antidote, yes." Nefud shook his head. "But--" 
    "Don't be dense, Nefud. The Duke almost killed me with that poison-capsule tooth. The gas he exhaled into my presence deprived me of my most valuable Mentat, Piter. I need a replacement." 
    "Hawat?" 
    "Hawat." 
    "But--"
    "You're going to say Hawat's completely loyal to the Atreides. True, but the Atreides are dead. We will woo him. He must be convinced he's not to blame for the Duke's demise. It was all the doing of that Bene Gesserit witch. He had an inferior master, one whose reason was clouded by emotion. Mentats admire the ability to calculate without emotion, Nefud. We will woo the formidable Thufir Hawat." 
    "Woo him. Yes, m'Lord."
    "Hawat, unfortunately, had a master whose resources were poor, one who could not elevate a Mentat to the sublime peaks of reasoning that are a Mentat's right. Hawat will see a certain element of truth in this. The Duke couldn't afford the most efficient spies to provide his Mentat with the required information." The Baron stared at Nefud. "Let us never deceive ourselves, Nefud. The truth is a powerful weapon. We know how we overwhelmed the Atreides. Hawat knows, too. We did it with wealth." 
    "With wealth. Yes, m'Lord."
    "We will woo Hawat," the Baron said. "We will hide him from the Sardaukar. And we will hold in reserve . . . the withdrawal of the antidote for the poison. There's no way of removing the residual poison. And, Nefud, Hawat need never suspect. The antidote will not betray itself to a poison snooper. Hawat can scan his food as he pleases and detect no trace of poison." 
    Nefud's eyes opened wide with understanding.
    "The absence of a thing," the Baron said, "this can be as deadly as the presence. The absence of air, eh? The absence of water? The absence of anything else we're addicted to." The Baron nodded. "You understand me, Nefud?" 
    Nefud swallowed. "Yes, m'Lord."
    Then get busy. Find the Sardaukar commander and set things in motion." 
    "At once, m'Lord." Nefud bowed, turned, and hurried away.
    Hawat by my side! the Baron thought. The Sardaukar will give him to me. If they suspect anything at all it's that I wish to destroy the Mentat. And this suspicion I'll confirm! The fools! One of the most formidable Mentats in all history, a Mentat trained to kill, and they'll toss him to me like some silly toy to be broken. I will show them what use can be made of such a toy.
    The Baron reached beneath a drapery beside his suspensor bed, pressed a button to summon his older nephew, Rabban. He sat back, smiling.
    And all the Atreides dead!
    The stupid guard captain had been right, of course. Certainly, nothing survived in the path of a sandblast storm on Arrakis. Not an ornithopter . . . or its occupants. The woman and the boy were dead. The bribes in the right places, the unthinkable expenditure to bring overwhelming military force down onto one planet . . . all the sly reports tailored for the Emperor's ears alone, all the careful scheming were here at last coming to full fruition. 
    Power and fear--fear and power!
    The Baron could see the path ahead of him. One day, a Harkonnen would be Emperor. Not himself, and no spawn of his loins. But a Harkonnen. Not this Rabban he'd summoned, of course. But Rabban's younger brother, young Feyd-Rautha. There was a sharpness to the boy that the Baron enjoyed . . . a ferocity.
    A lovely boy, the Baron thought. A year or two more--say, by the time he's seventeen, I'll know for certain whether he's the tool that House Harkonnen requires to gain the throne. 
    "M'Lord Baron."
    The man who stood outside the doorfield of the Baron's bedchamber was low built, gross of face and body, with the Harkonnen paternal line's narrow-set eyes and bulge of shoulders. There was yet some rigidity in his fat, but it was obvious to the eye that he'd come one day to the portable suspensors for carrying his excess weight.
    A muscle-minded tank-brain, the Baron thought. No Mentat, my nephew . . . not a Piter de Vries, but perhaps something more precisely devised for the task at hand. If I give him freedom to do it, he'll grind over everything in his path. Oh, how he'll be hated here on Arrakis!
    "My dear Rabban," the Baron said. He released the doorfield, but pointedly kept his body shield at full strength, knowing that the shimmer of it would be visible above the bedside glowglobe.
    "You summoned me," Rabban said. He stepped into the room, flicked a glance past the air disturbance of the body shield, searched for a suspensor chair, found none.
    "Stand closer where I can see you easily," the Baron said.
    Rabban advanced another step, thinking that the damnable old man had deliberately removed all chairs, forcing a visitor to stand.
    "The Atreides are dead," the Baron said. "The last of them. That's why I summoned you here to Arrakis. This planet is again yours."
    Rabban blinked. "But I thought you were going to advance Piter de Vries to the--" 
    "Piter, too, is dead." 
    "Piter?" 
    "Piter."
    The Baron reactivated the doorfield, blanked it against all energy penetration.
    "You finally tired of him, eh?" Rabban asked.
    His voice fell flat and lifeless in the energy-blanketed room.
    "I will say a thing to you just this once," the Baron rumbled. "You insinuate that I obliterated Piter as one obliterates a trifle." He snapped fat fingers. "Just like that, eh? I am not so stupid, Nephew. I will take it unkindly if ever again you suggest by word or action that I am so stupid."
    Fear showed in the squinting of Rabban's eyes. He knew within certain limits how far the old Baron would go against family. Seldom to the point of death unless there were outrageous profit or provocation in it. But family punishments could be painful.
    "Forgive me, m'Lord Baron," Rabban said. He lowered his eyes as much to hide his own anger as to show subservience. 
    "You do not fool me, Rabban," the Baron said. 
    Rabban kept his eyes lowered, swallowed.
    "I make a point," the Baron said. "Never obliterate a man unthinkingly, the way an entire fief might do it through some due process of law. Always do it for an overriding purpose--and know your purpose!"
    Anger spoke in Rabban: "But you obliterated the traitor, Yueh! I saw his body being carried out as I arrived last night." 
    Rabban stared at his uncle, suddenly frightened by the sound of those words.
    But the Baron smiled. "I'm very careful about dangerous weapons," he said. "Doctor Yueh was a traitor. He gave me the Duke." Strength poured into the Baron's voice. "I suborned a doctor of the Suk School! The Inner School! You hear, boy? But that's a wild sort of weapon to leave lying about. I didn't obliterate him casually." 
    "Does the Emperor know you suborned a Suk doctor?" 
    This was a penetrating question, the Baron thought. Have I misjudged this nephew?
    "The Emperor doesn't know it yet," the Baron said. "But his Sardaukar are sure to report it to him. Before that happens, though, I'll have my own report in his hands through CHOAM Company channels. I will explain that I luckily discovered a doctor who pretended to the conditioning. A false doctor, you understand? Since everyone knows you cannot counter the conditioning of a Suk School, this will be accepted." 
    "Ah-h-h, I see," Rabban murmured.
    And the Baron thought: Indeed, I hope you do see. I hope you do see how vital it is that this remain secret. The Baron suddenly wondered at himself. Why did I do that? Why did I boast to this fool nephew of mine--the nephew I must use and discard? The Baron felt anger at himself. He felt betrayed.
    "It must be kept secret," Rabban said. "I understand." 
    The Baron sighed. "I give you different instructions about Arrakis this time, Nephew. When last you ruled this place, I held you in strong rein. This time, I have only one requirement." 
    "M'Lord?" 
    "Income." 
    "Income?"
    "Have you any idea, Rabban, how much we spent to bring such military force to bear on the Atreides? Do you have even the first inkling of how much the Guild charges for military transport?" 
    "Expensive, eh?" 
    "Expensive!"
    The Baron shot a fat arm toward Rabban. "If you squeeze Arrakis for every cent it can give us for sixty years, you'll just barely repay us!" 
    Rabban opened his mouth, closed it without speaking.
    "Expensive," the Baron sneered. "The damnable Guild monopoly on space would've ruined us if I hadn't planned for this expense long ago. You should know, Rabban, that we bore the entire brunt of it. We even paid for transport of the Sardaukar." 
    And not for the first time, the Baron wondered if there ever would come a day when the Guild might be circumvented. They were insidious--bleeding off just enough to keep the host from objecting until they had you in their fist where they could force you to pay and pay and pay.
    Always, the exorbitant demands rode upon military ventures. "Hazard rates," the oily Guild agents explained. And for every agent you managed to insert as a watchdog in the Guild Bank structure, they put two agents into your system. 
    Insufferable!
    "Income then," Rabban said.
    The Baron lowered his arm, made a fist. "You must squeeze." 
    "And I may do anything I wish as long as I squeeze?" 
    "Anything." 
    "The cannons you brought," Rabban said. "Could I--" 
    "I'm removing them," the Baron said. 
    "But you--"
    "You won't need such toys. They were a special innovation and are now useless. We need the metal. They cannot go against a shield, Rabban. They were merely the unexpected. It was predictable that the Duke's men would retreat into cliff caves on this abominable planet. Our cannon merely sealed them in."
    "The Fremen don't use shields." 
    "You may keep some lasguns if you wish." 
    "Yes, m 'Lord. And I have a free hand." 
    "As long as you squeeze." 
    Rabban's smile was gloating. "I understand perfectly, m'Lord." 
    "You understand nothing perfectly," the Baron growled. "Let us have that clear at the outset. What you do understand is how to carry out my orders. Has it occurred to you, nephew, that there are at least five million persons on this planet?"
    "Does m'Lord forget that I was his regent-siridar here before? And if m'Lord will forgive me, his estimate may be low. It's difficult to count a population scattered among sinks and pans the way they are here. And when you consider the Fremen of--" 
    "The Fremen aren't worth considering!" 
    "Forgive me, m'Lord, but the Sardaukar believe otherwise." 
    The Baron hesitated, staring at his nephew. "You know something?"
    "M'Lord had retired when I arrived last night. I . . . ah, took the liberty of contacting some of my lieutenants from . . . ah, before. They've been acting as guides to the Sardaukar. They report that a Fremen band ambushed a Sardaukar force somewhere southeast of here and wiped it out." 
    "Wiped out a Sardaukar force?" 
    "Yes, m'Lord." 
    "Impossible!" 
    Rabban shrugged.
    "Fremen defeating Sardaukar," the Baron sneered.
    "I repeat only what was reported to me," Rabban said. "It is said this Fremen force already had captured the Duke's redoubtable Thufir Hawat." 
    "Ah-h-h-h-h-h." 
    The Baron nodded, smiling.
    "I believe the report," Rabban said. "You've no idea what a problem the Fremen were."
    "Perhaps, but these weren't Fremen your lieutenants saw. They must've been Atreides men trained by Hawat and disguised as Fremen. It's the only possible answer."
    Again, Rabban shrugged. "Well, the Sardaukar think they were Fremen. The Sardaukar already have launched a program to wipe out all Fremen." 
    "Good!" 
    "But--" 
    "It'll keep the Sardaukar occupied. And we'll soon have Hawat. I know it! I can feel it! Ah, this has been a day! The Sardaukar off hunting a few useless desert bands while we get the real prize!" 
    "M'Lord . . . " Rabban hesitated, frowning. "I've always felt that we underestimated the Fremen, both in numbers and in--" 
    "Ignore them, boy! They're rabble. It's the populous towns, cities, and villages that concern us. A great many people there, eh?" 
    "A great many, m'Lord." 
    "They worry me, Rabban." 
    "Worry you?"
    "Oh . . . ninety per cent of them are of no concern. But there are always a few . . . Houses Minor and so on, people of ambition who might try a dangerous thing. If one of them should get off Arrakis with an unpleasant story about what happened here, I'd be most displeased. Have you any idea how displeased I'd be?" 
    Rabban swallowed.
    "You must take immediate measures to hold a hostage from each House Minor," the Baron said. "As far as anyone off Arrakis must learn, this was straightforward House-to-House battle. The Sardaukar had no part in it, you understand? The Duke was offered the usual quarter and exile, but he died in an unfortunate accident before he could accept. He was about to accept, though. That is the story. And any rumor that there were Sardaukar here, it must be laughed at." 
    "As the Emperor wishes it," Rabban said. 
    "As the Emperor wishes it." 
    "What about the smugglers?"
    "No one believes smugglers, Rabban. They are tolerated, but not believed. At any rate, you'll be spreading some bribes in that quarter . . . and taking other measures which I'm sure you can think of." 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    "Two things from Arrakis, then, Rabban: income and a merciless fist. You must show no mercy here. Think of these clods as what they are--slaves envious of their masters and waiting only the opportunity to rebel. Not the slightest vestige of pity or mercy must you show them." 
    "Can one exterminate an entire planet?" Rabban asked.
    "Exterminate?" Surprise showed in the swift turning of the Baron's head. "Who said anything about exterminating?" 
    "Well, I presumed you were going to bring in new stock and--" 
    "I said squeeze. Nephew, not exterminate. Don't waste the population, merely drive them into utter submission. You must be the carnivore, my boy." He smiled, a baby's expression in the dimple-fat face. "A carnivore never stops. Show no mercy. Never stop. Mercy is a chimera. It can be defeated by the stomach rumbling its hunger, by the throat crying its thirst. You must be always hungry and thirsty." The Baron caressed his bulges beneath the suspensors. "Like me." 
    "I see, m'Lord." 
    Rabban swung his gaze left and right. 
    "It's all clear then, Nephew?" 
    "Except for one thing. Uncle: the planetologist, Kynes." 
    "Ah, yes, Kynes."
    "He's the Emperor's man, m'Lord. He can come and go as he pleases. And he's very close to the Fremen . . . married one." 
    "Kynes will be dead by tomorrow's nightfall." 
    "That's dangerous work, Uncle, killing an Imperial servant." 
    "How do you think I've come this far this quickly?" the Baron demanded. His voice was low, charged with unspeakable adjectives. "Besides, you need never have feared Kynes would leave Arrakis. You're forgetting that he's addicted to the spice." 
    "Of course!"
    "Those who know will do nothing to endanger their supply," the Baron said. "Kynes certainly must know." 
    "I forgot, "Rabban said.
    They stared at each other in silence.
    Presently, the Baron said: "Incidentally, you will make my own supply one of your first concerns. I've quite a stockpile of private stuff, but that suicide raid by the Duke's men got most of what we'd stored for sale." 
    Rabban nodded. "Yes, m'Lord."
    The Baron brightened. "Now, tomorrow morning, you will assemble what remains of organization here and you'll say to them: 'Our Sublime Padishah Emperor has charged me to take possession of this planet and end all dispute.' " 
    "I understand, m'Lord."
    "This time, I'm sure you do. We will discuss it in more detail tomorrow. Now, leave me to finish my sleep."
    The Baron deactivated his doorfield, watched his nephew out of sight.
    A tank-brain, the Baron thought. Muscle-minded tank-brain. They will be bloody pulp here when he's through with them. Then, when I send in Feyd-Rautha to take the load off them, they'll cheer their rescuer. Beloved Feyd-Rautha. Benign Feyd-Rautha, the compassionate one who saves them from a beast. Feyd-Rautha, a man to follow and die for. The boy will know by that time how to oppress with impunity. I'm sure he's the one we need. He'll learn. And such a lovely body. Really a lovely boy.

= = = = = =

At the age of fifteen, he had already learned silence.
-from "A Child's History of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    As Paul fought the 'thopter's controls, he grew aware that he was sorting out the interwoven storm forces, his more than Mentat awareness computing on the basis of fractional minutiae. He felt dust fronts, billowings, mixings of turbulence, an occasional vortex.
    The cabin interior was an angry box lighted by the green radiance of instrument dials. The tan flow of dust outside appeared featureless, but his inner sense began to see through the curtain. 
    I must find the right vortex, he thought.
    For a long time now he had sensed the storm's power diminishing, but still it shook them. He waited out another turbulence.
    The vortex began as an abrupt billowing that rattled the entire ship. Paul defied all fear to bank the 'thopter left. 
    Jessica saw the maneuver on the attitude globe. 
    "Paul!" she screamed.
    The vortex turned them, twisting, tipping. It lifted the 'thopter like a chip on a geyser, spewed them up and out--a winged speck within a core of winding dust lighted by the second moon.
    Paul looked down, saw the dust-defined pillar of hot wind that had disgorged them, saw the dying storm trailing away like a dry river into the desert--moon-gray motion growing smaller and smaller below as they rode the updraft. 
    "We're out of it," Jessica whispered.
    Paul turned their craft away from the dust in swooping rhythm while he scanned the night sky.
    "We've given them the slip," he said.
    Jessica felt her heart pounding. She forced herself to calmness, looked at the diminishing storm. Her time sense said they had ridden within that compounding of elemental forces almost four hours, but part of her mind computed the passage as a lifetime. She felt reborn.
    It was like the litany, she thought. We faced it and did not resist. The storm passed through us and around us. It's gone, but we remain.
    "I don't like the sound of our wing motion," Paul said. "We suffered some damage in there."
    He felt the grating, injured flight through his hands on the controls. They were out of the storm, but still not out into the full view of his prescient vision. Yet, they had escaped, and Paul sensed himself trembling on the verge of a revelation. 
    He shivered.
    The sensation was magnetic and terrifying, and he found himself caught on the question of what caused this trembling awareness. Part of it, he felt, was the spice-saturated diet of Arrakis. But he thought part of it could be the litany, as though the words had a power of their own.
    "I shall not fear . . . "
    Cause and effect: he was alive despite malignant forces, and he felt himself poised on a brink of self-awareness that could not have been without the litany's magic.
    Words from the Orange Catholic Bible rang through his memory: "What senses do we lack that we cannot see or hear another world all around us?"
    "There's rock all around," Jessica said.
    Paul focused on the 'thopter's launching, shook his head to clear it. He looked where his mother pointed, saw uplifting rock shapes black on the sand ahead and to the right. He felt wind around his ankles, a stirring of dust in the cabin. There was a hole somewhere, more of the storm's doing.
    "Better set us down on sand," Jessica said. "The wings might not take full brake."
    He nodded toward a place ahead where sandblasted ridges lifted into moonlight above the dunes. "I'll set us down near those rocks. Check your safety harness."
    She obeyed, thinking: We've water and stillsuits. If we can find food, we can survive a long time on this desert. Fremen live here. What they can do we can do.
    "Run for those rocks the instant we're stopped," Paul said. "I'll take the pack." 
    "Run for . . . " She fell silent, nodded. "Worms." 
    "Our friends, the worms," he corrected her. "They'll get this 'thopter. There'll be no evidence of where we landed."
    How direct his thinking, she thought.
    They glided lower . . . lower . . . 
    There came a rushing sense of motion to their passage--blurred shadows of dunes, rocks lifting like islands. The 'thopter touched a dune top with a soft lurch, skipped a sand valley, touched another dune.
    He's killing our speed against the sand, Jessica thought, and permitted herself to admire his competence. 
    "Brace yourself!" Paul warned.
    He pulled back on the wing brakes, gently at first, then harder and harder. He felt them cup the air, their aspect ratio dropping faster and faster. Wind screamed through the lapped coverts and primaries of the wings' leaves.
    Abruptly, with only the faintest lurch of warning, the left wing, weakened by the storm, twisted upward and in, slamming across the side of the 'thopter. The craft skidded across a dune top, twisting to the left. It tumbled down the opposite face to bury its nose in the next dune amid a cascade of sand. They lay stopped on the broken wing side, the right wing pointing toward the stars.
    Paul jerked off his safety harness, hurled himself upward across his mother, wrenching the door open. Sand poured around them into the cabin, bringing a dry smell of burned flint. He grabbed the pack from the rear, saw that his mother was free of her harness. She stepped up onto the side of the right-hand seat and out onto the 'thopter's metal skin. Paul followed, dragging the pack by its straps.
    "Run!" he ordered.
    He pointed up the dune face and beyond it where they could see a rock tower undercut by sandblast winds.
    Jessica leaped off the 'thopter and ran, scrambling and sliding up the dune. She heard Paul's panting progress behind. They came out onto a sand ridge that curved away toward the rocks. 
    "Follow the ridge," Paul ordered. "It'll be faster." 
    They slogged toward the rocks, sand gripping their feet.
    A new sound began to impress itself on them: a muted whisper, a hissing, an abrasive slithering. 
    "Worm," Paul said. 
    It grew louder.
    "Faster!" Paul gasped. 
    The first rock shingle, like a beach slanting from the sand, lay no more than ten meters ahead when they heard metal crunch and shatter behind them.
    Paul shifted his pack to his right arm, holding it by the straps. It slapped his side as he ran. He took his mother's arm with his other hand. They scrambled onto the lifting rock, up a pebble-littered surface through a twisted, wind-carved channel. Breath came dry and gasping in their throats.
    "I can't run any farther," Jessica panted.
    Paul stopped, pressed her into a gut of rock, turned and looked down onto the desert. A mound-in-motion ran parallel to their rock island--moonlit ripples, sand waves, a cresting burrow almost level with Paul's eyes at a distance of about a kilometer. The flattened dunes of its track curved once--a short loop crossing the patch of desert where they had abandoned their wrecked ornithopter.
    Where the worm had been there was no sign of the aircraft.
    The burrow mound moved outward into the desert, coursed back across its own path, questing.
    "It's bigger than a Guild spaceship," Paul whispered. "I was told worms grew large in the deep desert, but I didn't realize . . . how big." 
    "Nor I," Jessica breathed.
    Again, the thing turned out away from the rocks, sped now with a curving track toward the horizon. They listened until the sound of its passage was lost in gentle sand stirrings around them. 
    Paul took a deep breath, looked up at the moon-frosted escarpment, and quoted from the Kitab al-Ibar: "Travel by night and rest in black shade through the day." He looked at his mother. "We still have a few hours of night. Can you go on?" 
    "In a moment."
    Paul stepped out onto the rock shingle, shouldered the pack and adjusted its straps. He stood a moment with a paracompass in his hands.
    "Whenever you're ready," he said.
    She pushed herself away from the rock, feeling her strength return. "Which direction?" 
    "Where this ridge leads." He pointed. 
    "Deep into the desert," she said. 
    "The Fremen desert," Paul whispered.
    And he paused, shaken by the remembered high relief imagery of a prescient vision he had experienced on Caladan. He had seen this desert. But the set of the vision had been subtly different, like an optical image that had disappeared into his consciousness, been absorbed by memory, and now failed of perfect registry when projected onto the real scene. The vision appeared to have shifted and approached him from a different angle while he remained motionless.
    Idaho was with us in the vision, he remembered. But now Idaho is dead.
    "Do you see a way to go?" Jessica asked, mistaking his hesitation.
    "No," he said, "But we'll go anyway."
    He settled his shoulders more firmly in the pack, struck out up a sand-carved channel in the rock. The channel opened onto a moonlit floor of rock with benched ledges climbing away to the south.
    Paul headed for the first ledge, clambered onto it. Jessica followed.
    She noted presently how their passage became a matter of the immediate and particular--the sand pockets between rocks where their steps were slowed, the wind-carved ridge that cut their hands, the obstruction that forced a choice: Go over or go around? The terrain enforced its own rhythms. They spoke only when necessary and then with the hoarse voices of their exertion. 
    "Careful here--this ledge is slippery with sand." 
    "Watch you don't hit your head against this overhang." 
    "Stay below this ridge; the moon's at our backs and it'd show our movement to anyone out there."
    Paul stopped in a bight of rock, leaned the pack against a narrow ledge.
    Jessica leaned beside him, thankful for the moment of rest. She heard Paul pulling at his stillsuit tube, sipped her own reclaimed water. It tasted brackish, and she remembered the waters of Caladan--a tall fountain enclosing a curve of sky, such a richness of moisture that it hadn't been noticed for itself . . . only for its shape, or its reflection, or its sound as she stopped beside it. 
    To stop, she thought. To rest . . . truly rest.
    It occurred to her that mercy was the ability to stop, if only for a moment. There was no mercy where there could be no stopping.
    Paul pushed away from the rock ledge, turned, and climbed over a sloping surface. Jessica followed with a sigh.
    They slid down onto a wide shelf that led around a sheer rock face. Again, they fell into the disjointed rhythm of movement across this broken land.
    Jessica felt that the night was dominated by degrees of smallness in substances beneath their feet and hands--boulders or pea gravel or flaked rock or pea sand or sand itself or grit or dust or gossamer powder.
    The powder clogged nose filters and had to be blown out. Pea sand and pea gravel rolled on a hard surface and could spill the unwary. Rock flakes cut.
    And the omnipresent sand patches dragged against their feet.
    Paul stopped abruptly on a rock shelf, steadied his mother as she stumbled into him.
    He was pointing left and she looked along his arm to see that they stood atop a cliff with the desert stretched out like a static ocean some two hundred meters below. It lay there full of moon-silvered waves--shadows of angles that lapsed into curves and, in the distance, lifted to the misted gray blur of another escarpment. 
    "Open desert," she said.
    "A wide place to cross," Paul said, and his voice was muffled by the filter trap across his face.
    Jessica glanced left and right--nothing but sand below.
    Paul stared straight ahead across the open dunes, watching the movement of shadows in the moon's passage. "About three or four kilometers across," he said. 
    "Worms," she said. 
    "Sure to be."
    She focused on her weariness, the muscle ache that dulled her senses. "Shall we rest and eat?"
    Paul slipped out of the pack, sat down and leaned against it. Jessica supported herself by a hand on his shoulder as she sank to the rock beside him. She felt Paul turn as she settled herself, heard him scrabbling in the pack. 
    "Here," he said.
    His hand felt dry against hers as he pressed two energy capsules into her palm
    She swallowed them with a grudging spit of water from her stillsuit tube.
    "Drink all your water," Paul said. "Axiom: the best place to conserve your water is in your body. It keeps your energy up. You're stronger. Trust your stillsuit."
    She obeyed, drained her catchpockets, feeling energy return. She thought then how peaceful it was here in this moment of their tiredness, and she recalled once hearing the minstrel-warrior Gurney Halleck say, "Better a dry morsel and quietness therewith than a house full of sacrifice and strife." 
    Jessica repeated the words to Paul. 
    "That was Gurney," he said.
    She caught the tone of his voice, the way he spoke as of someone dead, thought: And well poor Gurney might be dead. The Atreides forces were either dead or captive or lost like themselves in this waterless void.
    "Gurney always had the right quotation," Paul said. "I can hear him now: 'And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand of the wicked; and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers.' "
    Jessica closed her eyes, found herself moved close to tears by the pathos in her son's voice.
    Presently, Paul said: "How do you . . . feel?" 
    She recognized that his question was directed at her pregnancy, said: "Your sister won't be born for many months yet. I still feel . . . physically adequate."
    And she thought: How stiffly formal I speak to my own son! Then, because it was the Bene Gesserit way to seek within for the answer to such an oddity, she searched and found the source of her formality: I'm afraid of my son; I fear his strangeness; I fear what he may see ahead of us, what he may tell me.
    Paul pulled his hood down over his eyes, listened to the bug-hustling sounds of the night. His lungs were charged with his own silence. His nose itched. He rubbed it, removed the filter and grew conscious of the rich smell of cinnamon.
    "There's melange spice nearby," he said.
    An eider wind feathered Paul's cheeks, ruffled the folds of his burnoose. But this wind carried no threat of storm; already he could sense the difference. 
    "Dawn soon," he said. 
    Jessica nodded.
    "There's a way to get safely across that open sand," Paul said. "The Fremen do it." 
    "The worms?"
    "If we were to plant a thumper from our Fremkit back in the rocks here," Paul said. "It'd keep a worm occupied for a time." 
    She glanced at the stretch of moonlighted desert between them and the other escarpment. "Four kilometers worth of time?" 
    "Perhaps. And if we crossed there making only natural sounds, the kind that don't attract the worms . . . "
    Paul studied the open desert, questing in his prescient memory, probing the mysterious allusions to thumpers and maker hooks in the Fremkit manual that had come with their escape pack. He found it odd that all he sensed was pervasive terror at thought of the worms. He knew as though it lay just at the edge of his awareness that the worms were to be respected and not feared . . . if . . . if . . . 
    He shook his head.
    "It'd have to be sounds without rhythm," Jessica said.
    "What? Oh. Yes. If we broke our steps . . . the sand itself must shift down at times. Worms can't investigate every little sound. We should be fully rested before we try it, though."
    He looked across at that other rock wall, seeing the passage of time in the vertical moonshadows there. "It'll be dawn within the hour." 
    "Where'll we spend the day?" she asked.
    Paul turned left, pointed. "The cliff curves back north over there. You can see by the way it's wind-cut that's the windward face. There'll be crevasses there, deep ones." 
    "Had we better get started?" she asked.
    He stood, helped her to her feet. "Are you rested enough for a climb down? I want to get as close as possible to the desert floor before we camp." 
    "Enough." She nodded for him to lead the way.
    He hesitated, then lifted the pack, settled it onto his shoulders and turned along the cliff.
    If only we had suspensors, Jessica thought. It'd be such a simple matter to jump down there. But perhaps suspensors are another thing to avoid in the open desert. Maybe they attract the worms the way a shield does.
    They came to a series of shelves dropping down and, beyond them, saw a fissure with its ledge outlined by moonshadow leading along the vestibule.
    Paul led the way down, moving cautiously but hurrying because it was obvious the moonlight could not last much longer. They wound down into a world of deeper and deeper shadows. Hints of rock shape climbed to the stars around them. The fissure narrowed to some ten meters' width at the brink of a dim gray sandslope that slanted downward into darkness.
    "Can we do down?" Jessica whispered. 
    "I think so." 
    He tested the surface with one foot.
    "We can slide down," he said. "I'll go first. Wait until you hear me stop." 
    "Careful," she said.
    He stepped onto the slope and slid and slipped down its soft surface onto an almost level floor of packed sand. The place was deep within the rock walls.
    There came the sound of sand sliding behind him. He tried to see up the slope in the darkness, was almost knocked over by the cascade. It trailed away to silence. 
    "Mother?" he said. 
    There was no answer. 
    "Mother?"
    He dropped the pack, hurled himself up the slope, scrambling, digging, throwing sand like a wild man. "Mother!" he gasped. "Mother, where are you?"
    Another cascade of sand swept down on him, burying him to the hips. He wrenched himself out of it.
    She's been caught in the sandslide, he thought. Buried in it. I must be calm and work this out carefully. She won't smother immediately. She'll compose herself in bindu suspension to reduce her oxygen needs. She knows I'll dig for her.
    In the Bene Gesserit way she had taught him, Paul stilled the savage beating of his heart, set his mind as a blank slate upon which the past few moments could write themselves. Every partial shift and twist of the slide replayed itself in his memory, moving with an interior stateliness that contrasted with the fractional second of real time required for the total recall.
    Presently, Paul moved slantwise up the slope, probing cautiously until he found the wall of the fissure, an outcurve of rock there. He began to dig, moving the sand with care not to dislodge another slide. A piece of fabric came under his hands. He followed it, found an arm. Gently, he traced the arm, exposed her face. 
    "Do you hear me?" he whispered. 
    No answer.
    He dug faster, freed her shoulders. She was limp beneath his hands, but he detected a slow heartbeat. 
    Bindu suspension, he told himself.
    He cleared the sand away to her waist, draped her arms over his shoulders and pulled downslope, slowly at first, then dragging her as fast as he could, feeling the sand give way above. Faster and faster he pulled her, gasping with the effort, fighting to keep his balance. He was out on the hard-packed floor of the fissure then, swinging her to his shoulder and breaking into a staggering run as the entire sandslope came down with a loud hiss that echoed and was magnified within the rock walls.
    He stopped at the end of the fissure where it looked out on the desert's marching dunes some thirty meters below. Gently, he lowered her to the sand, uttered the word to bring her out of the catalepsis.
    She awakened slowly, taking deeper and deeper breaths. 
    "I knew you'd find me," she whispered.
    He looked back up the fissure. "It might have been kinder if I hadn't." 
    "Paul!"
    "I lost the pack," he said. "It's buried under a hundred tons of sand . . . at least." 
    "Everything?"
    "The spare water, the stilltent--everything that counts." He touched a pocket. "I still have the paracompass." He fumbled at the waist sash. "Knife and binoculars. We can get a good look around the place where we'll die."
    In that instant, the sun lifted above the horizon somewhere to the left beyond the end of the fissure. Colors blinked in the sand out on the open desert. A chorus of birds held forth their songs from hidden places among the rocks.
    But Jessica had eyes only for the despair in Paul's face. She edged her voice with scorn, said: "Is this the way you were taught?"
    "Don't you understand?" he asked. "Everything we need to survive in this place is under that sand."
    "You found me," she said, and now her voice was soft, reasonable.
    Paul squatted back on his heels.
    Presently, he looked up the fissure at the new slope, studying it, marking the looseness of the sand.
    "If we could immobilize a small area of that slope and the upper face of a hole dug into the sand, we might be able to put down a shaft to the pack. Water might do it, but we don't have enough water for . . ." He broke off, then: "Foam."
    Jessica held herself to stillness lest she disturb the hyper-functioning of his mind.
    Paul looked out at the open dunes, searching with his nostrils as well as his eyes, finding the direction and then centering his attention on a darkened patch of sand below them.
    "Spice," he said. "Its essence--highly alkaline. And I have the paracompass. Its power pack is acid-base." 
    Jessica sat up straight against the rock.
    Paul ignored her, leaped to his feet, and was off down the wind-compacted surface that spilled from the end of the fissure to the desert's floor.
    She watched the way he walked, breaking his stride--step . . . pause, step-step . . . slide . . . pause . . .
    There was no rhythm to it that might tell a marauding worm something not of the desert moved here.
    Paul reached the spice patch, shoveled a mound of it into a fold of his robe, returned to the fissure. He spilled the spice onto the sand in front of Jessica, squatted and began dismantling the paracompass, using the point of his knife. The compass face came off. He removed his sash, spread the compass parts on it, lifted out the power pack. The dial mechanism came out next, leaving an empty dished compartment in the instrument. 
    "You'll need water," Jessica said.
    Paul took the catchtube from his neck, sucked up a mouthful, expelled it into the dished compartment.
    If this fails, that's water wasted, Jessica thought. But it won't matter then, anyway.
    With his knife, Paul cut open the power pack, spilled its crystals into the water. They foamed slightly, subsided.
    Jessica's eyes caught motion above them. She looked up to see a line of hawks along the rim of the fissure. They perched there staring down at the open water.
    Great Mother! she thought. They can sense water even at that distance!
    Paul had the cover back on the paracompass, leaving off the reset button which gave a small hole into the liquid. Taking the reworked instrument in one hand, a handful of spice in the other, Paul went back up the fissure, studying the lay of the slope. His robe billowed gently without the sash to hold it. He waded part way up the slope, kicking off sand rivulets, spurts of dust.
    Presently, he stopped, pressed a pinch of the spice into the paracompass, shook the instrument case.
    Green foam boiled out of the hole where the reset button had been. Paul aimed it at the slope, spread a low dike there, began kicking away the sand beneath it, immobilizing the opened face with more foam.
    Jessica moved to a position below him, called out: "May I help?"
    "Come up and dig," he said. "We've about three meters to go. It's going to be a near thing." As he spoke, the foam stopped billowing from the instrument.
    "Quickly," Paul said. "No telling how long this foam will hold the sand."
    Jessica scrambled up beside Paul as he sifted another pinch of spice into the hole, shook the paracompass case. Again, foam boiled from it.
    As Paul directed the foam barrier, Jessica dug with her hands, hurling the sand down the slope. "How deep?" she panted.
    "About three meters," he said. "And I can only approximate the position. We may have to widen this hole." He moved a step aside, slipping in loose sand. "Slant your digging backward. Don't go straight down." 
    Jessica obeyed.
    Slowly, the hole went down, reaching a level even with the floor of the basin and still no sign of the pack.
    Could I have miscalculated? Paul asked himself. I'm the one that panicked originally and caused this mistake. Has that warped my ability?
    He looked at the paracompass. Less than two ounces of the acid infusion remained.
    Jessica straightened in the hole, rubbed a foam-stained hand across her cheek. Her eyes met Paul's.
    "The upper face," Paul said. "Gently, now." He added another pinch of spice to the container, sent the foam boiling around Jessica's hands as she began cutting a vertical face in the upper slant of the hole. On the second pass, her hands encountered something hard. Slowly, she worked out a length of strap with a plastic buckle.
    "Don't move any more of it," Paul said and his voice was almost a whisper.
    "We're out of foam." 
    Jessica held the strap in one hand, looked up at him.
    Paul threw the empty paracompass down onto the floor of the basin, said: "Give me your other hand. Now listen carefully. I'm going to pull you to the side and downhill. Don't let go of that strap. We won't get much more spill from the top. This slope has stabilized itself. All I'm going to aim for is to keep your head free of the sand. Once that hole's filled, we can dig you out and pull up the pack." 
    "I understand," she said. 
    "Ready?" 
    "Ready." She tensed her fingers on the strap.
    With one surge, Paul had her half out of the hole, holding her head up as the foam barrier gave way and sand spilled down. When it had subsided, Jessica remained buried to the waist, her left arm and shoulder still under the sand, her chin protected on a fold of Paul's robe. Her shoulder ached from the strain put on it. 
    "I still have the strap," she said.
    Slowly, Paul worked his hand into the sand beside her, found the strap. "Together," he said. "Steady pressure. We mustn't break it."
    More sand spilled down as they worked the pack up. When the strap cleared the surface, Paul stopped, freed his mother from the sand. Together then they pulled the pack downslope and out of its trap.
    In a few minutes they stood on the floor of the fissure holding the pack between them.
    Paul looked at his mother. Foam stained her face, her robe. Sand was caked to her where the foam had dried. She looked as though she had been a target for balls of wet, green sand. 
    "You look a mess," he said.
    "You're not so pretty yourself," she said. 
    They started to laugh, then sobered.
    "That shouldn't have happened," Paul said. "I was careless." 
    She shrugged, feeling caked sand fall away from her robe.
    "I'll put up the tent," he said. "Better slip off that robe and shake it out." He turned away, taking the pack. 
    Jessica nodded, suddenly too tired to answer.
    "There's anchor holes in the rock," Paul said. "Someone's tented here before."
    Why not? she thought as she brushed at her robe. This was a likely place--deep in rock walls and facing another cliff some four kilometers away--far enough above the desert to avoid worms but close enough for easy access before a crossing.
    She turned, seeing that Paul had the tent up, its rib-domed hemisphere blending with the rock walls of the fissure. Paul stepped past her, lifting his binoculars. He adjusted their internal pressure with a quick twist, focused the oil lenses on the other cliff lifting golden tan in morning light across open sand.
    Jessica watched as he studied that apocalyptic landscape, his eyes probing into sand rivers and canyons.
    "There are growing things over there," he said.
    Jessica found the spare binoculars in the pack beside the tent, moved up beside Paul.
    "There," he said, holding the binoculars with one hand and pointing with the other.
    She looked where he pointed.
    "Saguaro," she said. "Scrawny stuff." 
    "There may be people nearby," Paul said.
    "That could be the remains of a botanical testing station," she warned.
    "This is pretty far south into the desert," he said. He lowered his binoculars, rubbed beneath his filter baffle, feeling how dry and chapped his lips were, sensing the dusty taste of thirst in his mouth. "This has the feeling of a Fremen place," he said.
    "Are we certain the Fremen will be friendly?" she asked. 
    "Kynes promised their help."
    But there's desperation in the people of this desert, she thought. I felt some of it myself today. Desperate people might kill us for our water.
    She closed her eyes and, against this wasteland, conjured in her mind a scene from Caladan. There had been a vacation trip once on Caladan--she and the Duke Leto, before Paul's birth. They'd flown over the southern jungles, above the weed-wild shouting leaves and rice paddies of the deltas. And they had seen the ant lines in the greenery--man-gangs carrying their loads on suspensor-buoyed shoulder poles. And in the sea reaches there'd been the white petals of trimaran dhows. 
    All of it gone.
    Jessica opened her eyes to the desert stillness, to the mounting warmth of the day. Restless heat devils were beginning to set the air aquiver out on the open sand. The other rock face across from them was like a thing seen through cheap glass.
    A spill of sand spread its brief curtain across the open end of the fissure. The sand hissed down, loosed by puffs of morning breeze, by the hawks that were beginning to lift away from the clifftop. When the sandfall was gone, she still heard it hissing. It grew louder, a sound that once heard, was never forgotten. 
    "Worm," Paul whispered.
    It came from their right with an uncaring majesty that could not be ignored. A twisting burrow-mound of sand cut through the dunes within their field of vision. The mound lifted in front, dusting away like a bow wave in water. Then it was gone, coursing off to the left. 
    The sound diminished, died.
    "I've seen space frigates that were smaller," Paul whispered.
    She nodded, continuing to stare across the desert. Where the worm had passed there remained that tantalizing gap. It flowed bitterly endless before them, beckoning beneath its horizontal collapse of skyline.
    "When we've rested," Jessica said, "we should continue with your lessons."
    He suppressed a sudden anger, said: "Mother, don't you think we could do without . . ."
    "Today you panicked," she said. "You know your mind and bindu-nervature perhaps better than I do, but you've much yet to learn about your body's prana-musculature. The body does things of itself sometimes, Paul, and I can teach you about this. You must learn to control every muscle, every fiber of your body. You need review of the hands. We'll start with finger muscles, palm tendons, and tip sensitivity." She turned away. "Come, into the tent, now." 
    He flexed the fingers of his left hand, watching her crawl through the sphincter valve, knowing that he could not deflect her from this determination . . . that he must agree.
    Whatever has been done to me, I've been a party to it, he thought. 
    Review of the hand!
    He looked at his hand. How inadequate it appeared when measured against such creatures as that worm.

= = = = = =

We came from Caladan--a paradise world for our form of fife. There existed no need on Caladan to build a physical paradise or a paradise of the mind--we could see the actuality all around us. And the price we paid was the price men have always paid for achieving a paradise in this life--we went soft, we lost our edge.
-from "Muad'Dib: Conversations" by the Princess Irulan

    "So you're the great Gurney Halleck," the man said.
    Halleck stood staring across the round cavern office at the smuggler seated behind a metal desk. The man wore Fremen robes and had the half-tint blue eyes that told of off-planet foods in his diet. The office duplicated a space frigate's master control center--communications and viewscreens along a thirty-degree arc of wall, remote arming and firing banks adjoining, and the desk formed as a wall projection--part of the remaining curve.
    "I am Staban Tuek, son of Esmar Tuek," the smuggler said.
    "Then you're the one I owe thanks for the help we've received," Halleck said.
    "Ah-h-h, gratitude," the smuggler said. "Sit down." 
    A ship-type bucket seat emerged from the wall beside the screens and Halleck sank onto it with a sigh, feeling his weariness. He could see his own reflection now in a dark surface beside the smuggler and scowled at the lines of fatigue in his lumpy face. The inkvine scar along his jaw writhed with the scowl.
    Halleck turned from his reflection, stared at Tuek. He saw the family resemblance in the smuggler now--the father's heavy, over-hanging eyebrows and rock planes of cheeks and nose.
    "Your men tell me your father is dead, killed by the Harkonnens," Halleck said.
    "By the Harkonnens or by a traitor among your people," Tuek said.
    Anger overcame part of Halleck's fatigue. He straightened, said: "Can you name the traitor?" 
    "We are not sure." 
    "Thufir Hawat suspected the Lady Jessica."
    "Ah-h-h, the Bene Gesserit witch . . . perhaps. But Hawat is now a Harkonnen captive."
    "I heard," Halleck took a deep breath. "It appears we've a deal more killing ahead of us." 
    "We will do nothing to attract attention to us," Tuek said. 
    Halleck stiffened. "But--"
    "You and those of your men we've saved are welcome to sanctuary among us," Tuek said. "You speak of gratitude. Very well; work off your debt to us. We can always use good men. We'll destroy you out of hand, though, if you make the slightest open move against the Harkonnens." 
    "But they killed your father, man!"
    "Perhaps. And if so, I'll give you my father's answer to those who act without thinking: 'A stone is heavy and the sand is weighty; but a fool's wrath is heavier than them both.' " 
    "You mean to do nothing about it, then?" Halleck sneered.
    "You did not hear me say that. I merely say I will protect our contract with the Guild. The Guild requires that we play a circumspect game. There are other ways of destroying a foe." 
    "Ah-h-h-h-h."
    "Ah, indeed. If you've a mind to seek out the witch, have at it. But I warn you that you're probably too late . . .and we doubt she's the one you want, any way." 
    "Hawat made few mistakes." 
    "He allowed himself to fall into Harkonnen hands." 
    "You think he's the traitor?"
    Tuek shrugged. "This is academic. We think the witch is dead. At least the Harkonnens believe it." 
    "You seem to know a great deal about the Harkonnens." 
    "Hints and suggestions . . . rumors and hunches." 
    "We are seventy-four men," Halleck said. "If you seriously wish us to enlist with you, you must believe our Duke is dead." 
    "His body has been seen." 
    "And the boy, too--young Master Paul?" Halleck tried to swallow, found a lump in his throat.
    "According to the last word we had, he was lost with his mother in a desert storm. Likely not even their bones will ever be found." 
    "So the witch is dead then . . . all dead."
    Tuek nodded. "And Beast Rabban, so they say, will sit once more in the seat of power here on Dune." 
    "The Count Rabban of Lankiveil?" 
    "Yes."
    It took Halleck a moment to put down the upsurge of rage that threatened to overcome him. He spoke with panting breath: "I've a score of my own against Rabban. I owe him for the lives of my family . . . " He rubbed at the scar along his jaw. " . . . and for this . . . "
    "One does not risk everything to settle a score prematurely," Tuek said. He frowned, watching the play of muscles along Halleck's jaw, the sudden withdrawal in the man's shed-lidded eyes.
    "I know . . . I know." Halleck took a deep breath.
    "You and your men can work out your passage off Arrakis by serving with us. There are many places to--"
    "I release my men from any bond to me; they can choose for themselves. With Rabban here--I stay." 
    "In your mood, I'm not sure we want you to stay." 
    Halleck stared at the smuggler. "You doubt my word?" 
    "No-o-o . . . "
    "You've saved me from the Harkonnens. I gave loyalty to the Duke Leto for no greater reason. I'll stay on Arrakis--with you . . . or with the Fremen."
    "Whether a thought is spoken or not it is a real thing and it has power," Tuek said. "You might find the line between life and death among the Fremen to be too sharp and quick." 
    Halleck closed his eyes briefly, feeling the weariness surge up in him. "Where is the Lord who led us through the land of deserts and of pits?" he murmured.
    "Move slowly and the day of your revenge will come," Tuek said. "Speed is a device of Shaitan. Cool your sorrow--we've the diversions for it; three things there are that ease the heart--water, green grass, and the beauty of woman."
    Halleck opened his eyes. "I would prefer the blood of Rabban Harkonnen flowing about my feet." He stared at Tuek. "You think that day will come?"
    "I have little to do with how you'll meet tomorrow, Gurney Halleck. I can only help you meet today."
    "Then I'll accept that help and stay until the day you tell me to revenge your father and all the others who--"
    "Listen to me, fighting man," Tuek said. He leaned forward over his desk, his shoulders level with his ears, eyes intent. The smuggler's face was suddenly like weathered stone. "My father's water--I'll buy that back myself, with my own blade." 
    Halleck stared back at Tuek. In that moment, the smuggler reminded him of Duke Leto: a leader of men, courageous, secure in his own position and his own course. He was like the Duke . . . before Arrakis.
    "Do you wish my blade beside you?" Halleck asked. 
    Tuek sat back, relaxed, studying Halleck silently. 
    "Do you think of me as fighting man? " Halleck pressed.
    "You're the only one of the Duke's lieutenants to escape," Tuek said. "Your enemy was overwhelming, yet you rolled with him . . . You defeated him the way we defeat Arrakis." 
    "Eh?"
    "We live on sufferance down here, Gurney Halleck," Tuek said. "Arrakis is our enemy." 
    "One enemy at a time, is that it?" 
    "That's it." 
    "Is that the way the Fremen make out?" 
    "Perhaps."
    "You said I might find life with the Fremen too tough. They live in the desert, in the open, is that why?"
    "Who knows where the Fremen live? For us, the Central Plateau is a no-man's land. But I wish to talk more about--" 
    "I'm told that the Guild seldom routes spice lighters in over the desert," Halleck said. "But there are rumors that you can see bits of greenery here and there if you know where to look." 
    "Rumors!" Tuek sneered. "Do you wish to choose now between me and the Fremen? We have a measure of security, our own sietch carved out of the rock, our own hidden basins. We live the lives of civilized men. The Fremen are a few ragged bands that we use as spice-hunters." 
    "But they can kill Harkonnens."
    "And do you wish to know the result? Even now they are being hunted down like animals--with lasguns, because they have no shields. They are being exterminated. Why? Because they killed Harkonnens." 
    "Was it Harkonnens they killed?" Halleck asked. 
    "What do you mean?"
    "Haven't you heard that there may've been Sardaukar with the Harkonnens?" 
    "More rumors."
    "But a pogrom--that isn't like the Harkonnens. A pogrom is wasteful."
    "I believe what I see with my own eyes," Tuek said. "Make your choice, fighting man. Me or the Fremen. I will promise you sanctuary and a chance to draw the blood we both want. Be sure of that. The Fremen will offer you only the life of the hunted." 
    Halleck hesitated, sensing wisdom and sympathy in Tuek's words, yet troubled for no reason he could explain.
    "Trust your own abilities," Tuek said. "Whose decisions brought your force through the battle? Yours. Decide." 
    "It must be," Halleck said. "The Duke and his son are dead?" 
    "The Harkonnens believe it. Where such things are concerned, I incline to trust the Harkonnens." A grim smile touched Tuek's mouth. "But it's about the only trust I give them." 
    "Then it must be," Halleck repeated. He held out his right hand, palm up and thumb folded flat against it in the traditional gesture. "I give you my sword." 
    "Accepted." 
    "Do you wish me to persuade my men?" 
    "You'd let them make their own decision?"
    "They've followed me this far, but most are Caladan-born. Arrakis isn't what they thought it'd be. Here, they've lost everything except their lives. I'd prefer they decided for themselves now."
    "Now is no time for you to falter," Tuek said. "They've followed you this far." 
    "You need them, is that it?"
    "We can always use experienced fighting men . . . in these times more than ever."
    "You've accepted my sword. Do you wish me to persuade them?" 
    "I think they'll follow you, Gurney Halleck." 
    " 'Tis to be hoped." 
    "Indeed." 
    "I may make my own decision in this, then?" 
    "Your own decision."
    Halleck pushed himself up from the bucket seat, feeling how much of his reserve strength even that small effort required. "For now, I'll see to their quarters and well-being," he said.
    "Consult my quartermaster," Tuek said. "Drisq is his name. Tell him it's my wish that you receive every courtesy. I'll join you myself presently. I've some off-shipments of spice to see to first." 
    "Fortune passes everywhere," Halleck said.
    "Everywhere," Tuek said. "A time of upset is a rare opportunity for our business."
    Halleck nodded, heard the faint sussuration and felt the air shift as a lockport swung open beside him. He turned, ducked through it and out of the office.
    He found himself in the assembly hall through which he and his men had been led by Tuek's aides. It was a long, fairly narrow area chewed out of the native rock, its smooth surface betraying the use of cutteray burners for the job. The ceiling stretched away high enough to continue the natural supporting curve of the rock and to permit internal air-convection currents. Weapons racks and lockers lined the walls.
    Halleck noted with a touch of pride that those of his men still able to stand were standing--no relaxation in weariness and defeat for them. Smuggler medics were moving among them tending the wounded. Litter cases were assembled in one area down to the left, each wounded man with an Atreides companion.
    The Atreides training--"We care for our own!"--it held like a core of native rock in them, Halleck noted.
    One of his lieutenants stepped forward carrying Halleck's nine-string baliset out of its case. The man snapped a salute, said: "Sir, the medics here say there's no hope for Mattai. They have no bone and organ banks here--only outpost medicine. Mattai can't last, they say, and he has a request of you." 
    "What is it?"
    The lieutenant thrust the baliset forward. "Mattai wants a song to ease his going, sir. He says you'll know the one . . . he's asked it of you often enough." The lieutenant swallowed. "It's the one called 'My Woman,' sir. If you--"
    "I know." Halleck took the baliset, flicked the multipick out of its catch on the fingerboard. He drew a soft chord from the instrument, found that someone had already tuned it. There was a burning in his eyes, but he drove that out of his thoughts as he strolled forward, strumming the tune, forcing himself to smile casually.
    Several of his men and a smuggler medic were bent over one of the litters. One of the men began singing softly as Halleck approached, catching the counter-beat with the ease of long familiarity:

"My woman stands at her window, 
Curved lines 'gainst square glass. 
Uprais'd arms . . . bent . . . downfolded. 
'Gainst sunset red and golded--
Come to me . . .
Come to me, warm arms of my lass. 
For me . . .
For me, the warm arms of my lass."

    The singer stopped, reached out a bandaged arm and closed the eyelids of the man on the litter.
    Halleck drew a final soft chord from the baliset, thinking: Now we are seventy-three.

= = = = = =

Family life of the Royal Creche is difficult for many people to understand, but I shall try to give you a capsule view of it. My father had only one real friend, I think. That was Count Hasimir Fenring, the genetic-eunuch and one of the deadliest fighters in the Imperium. The Count, a dapper and ugly little man, brought a new slave-concubine to my father one day and I was dispatched by my mother to spy on the proceedings. All of us spied on my father as a matter of self-protection. One of the slave-concubines permitted my father under the Bene Gesserit-Guild agreement could not, of course, bear a Royal Successor, but the intrigues were constant and oppressive in their similarity. We became adept, my mother and sisters and I, at avoiding subtle instruments of death. It may seem a dreadful thing to say, but I 'm not at all sure my father was innocent in all these attempts. A Royal Family is not like other families. Here was a new slave-concubine, then, red-haired like my father, willowy and graceful. She had a dancer's muscles, and her training obviously had included neuro-enticement. My father looked at her for a long time as she postured unclothed before him. Finally he said: "She is too beautiful. We will save her as a gift. " You have no idea how much consternation this restraint created in the Royal Creche. Subtlety and self-control were, after all, the most deadly threats to us all.
-"In My Father's House" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul stood outside the stilltent in the late afternoon. The crevasse where he had pitched their camp lay in deep shadow. He stared out across the open sand at the distant cliff, wondering if he should waken his mother, who lay asleep in the tent.
    Folds upon folds of dunes spread beyond their shelter. Away from the setting sun, the dunes exposed greased shadows so black they were like bits of night. 
    And the flatness.
    His mind searched for something tall in that landscape. But there was no persuading tallness out of heat-addled air and that horizon--no bloom or gently shaken thing to mark the passage of a breeze . . . only dunes and that distant cliff beneath a sky of burnished silver-blue.
    What if there isn't one of the abandoned testing stations across there? he wondered. What if there are no Fremen, either, and the plants we see are only an accident?
    Within the tent, Jessica awakened, turned onto her back and peered sidelong out the transparent end at Paul, He stood with his back to her and something about his stance reminded her of his father. She sensed the well of grief rising within her and turned away.
    Presently she adjusted her stillsuit, refreshed herself with water from the tent's catchpocket, and slipped out to stand and stretch the sleep from her muscles.
    Paul spoke without turning: "I find myself enjoying the quiet here."
    How the mind gears itself for its environment, she thought. And she recalled a Bene Gesserit axiom: "The mind can go either direction under stress--toward positive or toward negative: on or off. Think of it as a spectrum whose extremes are unconsciousness at the negative end and hyperconsciousness at the positive end. The way the mind will lean under stress is strongly influenced by training." 
    "It could be a good life here," Paul said.
    She tried to see the desert through his eyes, seeking to encompass all the rigors this planet accepted as commonplace, wondering at the possible futures Paul had glimpsed. One could be alone out here, she thought, without fear of someone behind you, without fear of the hunter.
    She stepped past Paul, lifted her binoculars, adjusted the oil lenses and studied the escarpment across from them. Yes, saguaro in the arroyos and other spiny growth . . . and a matting of low grasses, yellow-green in the shadows.
    "I'll strike camp," Paul said.
    Jessica nodded, walked to the fissure's mouth where she could get a sweep of the desert, and swung her binoculars to the left. A salt pan glared white there with a blending of dirty tan at its edges--a field of white out here where white was death. But the pan said another thing: water. At some time water had flowed across that glaring white. She lowered her binoculars, adjusted her burnoose, listened for a moment to the sound of Paul's movements.
    The sun dipped lower. Shadows stretched across the salt pan. Lines of wild color spread over the sunset horizon. Color streamed into a toe of darkness testing the sand. Coal-colored shadows spread, and the thick collapse of night blotted the desert. 
    Stars!
    She stared up at them, sensing Paul's movements as he came up beside her. The desert night focused upward with a feeling of lift toward the stars. The weight of the day receded. There came a brief flurry of breeze across her face.
    "The first moon will be up soon," Paul said.  "The pack's ready. I've planted the thumper."
    We could be lost forever in this hellplace, she thought. And no one to know.
    The night wind spread sand runnels that grated across her face, bringing the smell of cinnamon: a shower of odors in the dark. 
    "Smell that," Paul said.
    "I can smell it even through the filter," she said. "Riches. But will it buy water?" She pointed across the basin. "There are no artificial lights across there."
    "Fremen would be hidden in a sietch behind those rocks," he said.
    A sill of silver pushed above the horizon to their right: the first moon. It lifted into view, the hand pattern plain on its face. Jessica studied the white-silver of sand exposed in the light.
    "I planted the thumper in the deepest part of the crevasse," Paul said. "Whenever I light its candle it'll give us about thirty minutes." 
    "Thirty minutes?" 
    "Before it starts calling . . . a . . . worm." 
    "Oh. I'm ready to go."
    He slipped away from her side and she heard his progress back up their fissure.
    The night is a tunnel, she thought, a hole into tomorrow . . . if we 're to have a tomorrow. She shook her head. Why must I be so morbid? I was trained better than that!
    Paul returned, took up the pack, led the way down to the first spreading dune where he stopped and listened as his mother came up behind him. He heard her soft progress and the cold single-grain dribbles of sound--the desert's own code spelling out its measure of safety.
    "We must walk without rhythm," Paul said and he called up memory of men walking the sand . . . both prescient memory and real memory.
    "Watch how I do it," he said. "This is how Fremen walk the sand."
    He stepped out onto the windward face of the dune, following the curve of it, moved with a dragging pace.
    Jessica studied his progress for ten steps, followed, imitating him. She saw the sense of it: they must sound like the natural shifting of sand . . . like the wind. But muscles protested this unnatural, broken pattern: Step . . . drag . . . drag . . . step . . . step . . . wait . . . drag . . . step . . .
    Time stretched out around them. The rock face ahead seemed to grow no nearer. The one behind still lowered high. 
    "Lump! Lump! Lump! Lump!" 
    It was a drumming from the cliff behind. 
    "The thumper," Paul hissed.
    Its pounding continued and they found difficulty avoiding the rhythm of it in their stride.
    "Lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . lump . . ."
    They moved in a moonlit bowl punctured by that hollowed thumping. Down and up through spilling dunes: step . . .drag . . . wait . . . step . . . Across pea sand that rolled under their feet: drag . . . wait . . . step . . .
    And all the while their ears searched for a special hissing.
    The sound, when it came, started so low that their own dragging passage masked it. But it grew . . . louder and louder . . . out of the west.
    "Lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . " drummed the thumper.
    The hissing approach spread across the night behind them. They turned their heads as they walked, saw the mound of the coursing worm.
    "Keep moving," Paul whispered. "Don't look back." 
    A grating sound of fury exploded from the rock shadows they had left. It was a flailing avalanche of noise. 
    "Keep moving," Paul repeating.
    He saw that they had reached an unmarked point where the two rock faces--the one ahead and the one behind--appeared equally remote.
    And still behind them, that whipping, frenzied tearing of rocks dominated the night.
    They moved on and on and on . . . Muscles reached a stage of mechanical aching that seemed to stretch out indefinitely, but Paul saw that the beckoning, escarpment ahead of them had climbed higher.
    Jessica moved in a void of concentration, aware that the pressure of her will alone kept her walking. Dryness ached in her mouth, but the sounds behind drove away all hope of stopping for a sip from her stillsuit's catchpockets. 
    "Lump . . . lump . . . "
    Renewed frenzy erupted from the distant cliff, drowning out the thumper. 
    Silence!
    "Faster," Paul whispered.
    She nodded, knowing he did not see the gesture, but needing the action to tell herself that it was necessary to demand even more from muscles that already were being taxed to their limits--the unnatural movement . . . 
    The rock face of safety ahead of them climbed into the stars, and Paul saw a plane of flat sand stretching out at the base. He stepped onto it, stumbled in his fatigue, righted himself with an involuntary out-thrusting of a foot.
    Resonant booming shook the sand around them. 
    Paul lurched sideways two steps. 
    "Boom! Boom!" 
    "Drum sand!" Jessica hissed.
    Paul recovered his balance. A sweeping glance took in the sand around them, the rock escarpment perhaps two hundred meters away.
    Behind them, he heard a hissing--like the wind, like a riptide where there was no water.
    "Run!" Jessica screamed. "Paul, run!" 
    They ran.
    Drum sound boomed beneath their feet. Then they were out of it and into pea gravel. For a time, the running was a relief to muscles that ached from unfamiliar, rhythmless use. Here was action that could be understood. Here was rhythm. But sand and gravel dragged at their feet. And the hissing approach of the worm was storm sound that grew around them.
    Jessica stumbled to her knees. All she could think of was the fatigue and the sound and the terror. 
    Paul dragged her up. 
    They ran on, hand in hand.
    A thin pole jutted from the sand ahead of them. They passed it, saw another.
    Jessica's mind failed to register on the poles until they were past.
    There was another--wind-etched surface thrust up from a crack in rock.
    Another. 
    Rock!
    She felt it through her feet, the shock of unresisting surface, gained new strength from the firmer footing.
    A deep crack stretched its vertical shadow upward into the cliff ahead of them. They sprinted for it, crowded into the narrow hole. 
    Behind them, the sound of the worm's passage stopped. 
    Jessica and Paul turned, peered out onto the desert.
    Where the dunes began, perhaps fifty meters away at the foot of a rock beach, a silver-gray curve broached from the desert, sending rivers of sand and dust cascading all around. It lifted higher, resolved into a giant, questing mouth. It was a round, black hole with edges glistening in the moonlight.
    The mouth snaked toward the narrow crack where Paul and Jessica huddled. Cinnamon yelled in their nostrils. Moonlight flashed from crystal teeth.
    Back and forth the great mouth wove. 
    Paul stilled his breathing. 
    Jessica crouched staring.
    It took intense concentration of her Bene Gesserit training to put down the primal terrors, subduing a race-memory fear that threatened to fill her mind. 
    Paul felt a kind of elation. In some recent instant, he had crossed a time barrier into more unknown territory. He could sense the darkness ahead, nothing revealed to his inner eye. It was as though some step he had taken had plunged him into a well . . . or into the trough of a wave where the future was invisible. The landscape had undergone a profound shifting.
    Instead of frightening him, the sensation of time-darkness forced a hyper-acceleration of his other senses. He found himself registering every available aspect of the thing that lifted from the sand there seeking him. Its mouth was some eighty meters in diameter . . . crystal teeth with the curved shape of crysknives glinting around the rim . . . the bellows breath of cinnamon, subtle aldehydes . . . acids . . . 
    The worm blotted out the moonlight as it brushed the rocks above them. A shower of small stones and sand cascaded into the narrow hiding place.
    Paul crowded his mother farther back. 
    Cinnamon!
    The smell of it flooded across him.
    What has the worm to do with the spice, melange? he asked himself. And he remembered Liet-Kynes betraying a veiled reference to some association between worm and spice. 
    "Barrrroooom!" 
    It was like a peal of dry thunder coming from far off to their right. 
    Again: "Barrrroooom!"
    The worm drew back onto the sand, lay there momentarily, its crystal teeth weaving moonflashes. 
    "Lump! Lump! Lump! Lump!" 
    Another thumper! Paul thought. 
    Again it sounded off to their right.
    A shudder passed through the worm. It drew farther away into the sand. Only a mounded upper curve remained like half a bell mouth, the curve of a tunnel rearing above the dunes. 
    Sand rasped.
    The creature sank farther, retreating, turning. It became a mound of cresting sand that curved away through a saddle in the dunes.
    Paul stepped out of the crack, watched the sand wave recede across the waste toward the new thumper summons.
    Jessica followed, listening: "Lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . lump . . ." 
    Presently the sound stopped.
    Paul found the tube into his stillsuit, sipped at the reclaimed water.
    Jessica focused on his action, but her mind felt blank with fatigue and the aftermath of terror. "Has it gone for sure?" she whispered. 
    "Somebody called it," Paul said. "Fremen." 
    She felt herself recovering. "It was so big!" 
    "Not as big as the one that got our 'thopter." 
    "Are you sure it was Fremen?" 
    "They used a thumper." 
    "Why would they help us?"
    "Maybe they weren't helping us. Maybe they were just calling a worm." 
    "Why?"
    An answer lay poised at the edge of his awareness, but refused to come. He had a vision in his mind of something to do with the telescoping barbed sticks in their packs--the "maker hooks." 
    "Why would they call a worm?" Jessica asked.
    A breath of fear touched his mind, and he forced himself to turn away from his mother, to look up the cliff. "We'd better find a way up there before daylight." He pointed. "Those poles we passed--there are more of them."
    She looked, following the line of his hand, saw the poles--wind-scratched markers--made out the shadow of a narrow ledge that twisted into a crevasse high above them.
    "They mark a way up the cliff," Paul said. He settled his shoulders into the pack, crossed to the foot of the ledge and began the climb upward.
    Jessica waited a moment, resting, restoring her strength; then she followed.
    Up they climbed, following the guide poles until the ledge dwindled to a narrow lip at the mouth of a dark crevasse.
    Paul tipped his head to peer into the shadowed place. He could feel the precarious hold his feet had on the slender ledge, but forced himself to slow caution. He saw only darkness within the crevasse. It stretched away upward, open to the stars at the top. His ears searched, found only sounds he could expect--a tiny spill of sand, an insect brrr, the patter of a small running creature. He tested the darkness in the crevasse with one foot, found rock beneath a gritting surface. Slowly, he inched around the corner, signaled for his mother to follow. He grasped a loose edge of her robe, helped her around.
    They looked upward at starlight framed by two rock lips. Paul saw his mother beside him as a cloudy gray movement. "If we could only risk a light," he whispered. 
    "We have other senses than eyes," she said.
    Paul slid a foot forward, shifted his weight, and probed with the other foot, met an obstruction. He lifted his foot, found a step, pulled himself up onto it. He reached back, felt his mother's arm, tugged at her robe for her to follow. 
    Another step.
    "It goes on up to the top, I think," he whispered.
    Shallow and even steps, Jessica thought. Man-carved beyond a doubt.
    She followed the shadowy movement of Paul's progress, feeling out the steps. Rock walls narrowed until her shoulders almost brushed them. The steps ended in a slitted defile about twenty meters long, its floor level, and this opened onto a shallow, moonlit basin.
    Paul stepped out into the rim of the basin, whispered: "What a beautiful place."
    Jessica could only stare in silent agreement from her position a step behind him.
    In spite of weariness, the irritation of recaths and nose plugs and the confinement of the stillsuit, in spite of fear and the aching desire for rest, this basin's beauty filled her senses, forcing her to stop and admire it.
    "Like a fairyland," Paul whispered. 
    Jessica nodded.
    Spreading away in front of her stretched desert growth--bushes, cacti, tiny clumps of leaves--all trembling in the moonlight. The ringwalls were dark to her left, moonfrosted on her right. 
    "This must be a Fremen place," Paul said.
    "There would have to be people for this many plants to survive," she agreed. She uncapped the tube to her stillsuit's catchpockets, sipped at it. Warm, faintly acrid wetness slipped down her throat. She marked how it refreshed her. The tube's cap grated against flakes of sand as she replaced it.
    Movement caught Paul's attention--to his right and down on the basin floor curving out beneath them. He stared down through smoke bushes and weeds into a wedged slab sand-surface of moonlight inhabited by an up-hop, jump, pop-hop of tiny motion. 
    "Mice!" he hissed.
    Pop-hop-hop! they went, into shadows and out.
    Something fell soundlessly past their eyes into the mice. There came a thin screech, a flapping of wings, and a ghostly gray bird lifted away across the basin with a small, dark shadow in its talons. 
    We needed that reminder, Jessica thought.
    Paul continued to stare across the basin. He inhaled, sensed the softly cutting contralto smell of sage climbing the night. The predatory bird--he thought of it as the way of this desert. It had brought a stillness to the basin so unuttered that the blue-milk moonlight could almost be heard flowing across sentinel saguaro and spiked paintbrush. There was a low humming of light here more basic in its harmony than any other music in his universe.
    "We'd better find a place to pitch the tent," he said. "Tomorrow we can try to find the Fremen who--" 
    "Most intruders here regret finding the Fremen!" 
    It was a heavy masculine voice chopping across his words, shattering the moment. The voice came from above them and to their right.
    "Please do not run, intruders," the voice said as Paul made to withdraw into the defile. "If you run you'll only waste your body's water."
    They want us for the water of our flesh! Jessica thought. Her muscles overrode all fatigue, flowed into maximum readiness without external betrayal. She pinpointed the location of the voice, thinking: Such stealth! I didn't hear him. And she realized that the owner of that voice had permitted himself only the small sounds, the natural sounds of the desert.
    Another voice called from the basin's rim to their left. "Make it quick, Stil. Get their water and let's be on our way. We've little enough time before dawn."
    Paul, less conditioned to emergency response than his mother, felt chagrin that he had stiffened and tried to withdraw, that he had clouded his abilities by a momentary panic. He forced himself now to obey her teachings: relax, than fall into the semblance of relaxation, then into the arrested whipsnap of muscles that can slash in any direction.
    Still, he felt the edge of fear within him and knew its source. This was blind time, no future he had seen . . . and they were caught between wild Fremen whose only interest was the water carried in the flesh of two unshielded bodies.

= = = = = =

This Fremen religious adaptation, then, is the source of what we now recognize as "The Pillars of the Universe," whose Qizara Tafwid are among us all with signs and proofs and prophecy. They bring us the Arrakeen mystical fusion whose profound beauty is typified by the stirring music built on the old forms, but stamped with the new awakening. Who has not heard and been deeply moved by "The Old Man's Hymn"? 
I drove my feet through a desert 
Whose mirage fluttered like a host. 
Voracious for glory, greedy for danger, 
I roamed the horizons of al-Kulab, 
Watching time level mountains 
In its search and its hunger for me. 
And I saw the sparrows swiftly approach, 
Bolder than the onrushing wolf. 
They spread in the tree of my youth.
I heard the flock in my branches 
And was caught on their beaks and claws!
-from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    The man crawled across a dunetop. He was a mote caught in the glare of the noon sun. He was dressed only in torn remnants of a jubba cloak, his skin bare to the heat through the tatters. The hood had been ripped from the cloak, but the man had fashioned a turban from a torn strip of cloth. Wisps of sandy hair protruded from it, matched by a sparse beard and thick brows. Beneath the blue-within-blue eyes, remains of a dark stain spread down to his cheeks. A matted depression across mustache and beard showed where a stillsuit tube had marked out its path from nose to catchpockets.
    The man stopped half across the dunecrest, arms stretched down the slipface. Blood had clotted on his back and on his arms and legs. Patches of yellow-gray sand clung to the wounds. Slowly, he brought his hands under him, pushed himself to his feet, stood there swaying. And even in this almost-random action there remained a trace of once-precise movement.
    "I am Liet-Kynes," he said, addressing himself to the empty horizon, and his voice was a hoarse caricature of the strength it had known. "I am His Imperial Majesty's Planetologist," he whispered, "planetary ecologist for Arrakis. I am steward of this land."
    He stumbled, fell sideways along the crusty surface of the windward face. His hands dug feebly into the sand. 
    I am steward of this sand, he thought.
    He realized that he was semi-delirious, that he should dig himself into the sand, find the relatively cool underlayer and cover himself with it. But he could still smell the rank, semisweet esters of a pre-spice pocket somewhere underneath this sand. He knew the peril within this fact more certainly than any other Fremen. If he could smell the pre-spice mass, that meant the gasses deep under the sand were nearing explosive pressure. He had to get away from here.
    His hands made weak scrabbling motions along the dune face.
    A thought spread across his mind--clear, distinct: The real wealth of a planet is in its landscape, how we take part in that basic source of civilization--agriculture.
    And he thought how strange it was that the mind, long fixed on a single track, could not get off that track. The Harkonnen troopers had left him here without water or stillsuit, thinking a worm would get him if the desert didn't. They had thought it amusing to leave him alive to die by inches at the impersonal hands of his planet.
    The Harkonnens always did find it difficult to kill Fremen, he thought. We don't die easily. I should be dead now . . . I will be dead soon . . . but I can't stop being an ecologist.
    "The highest function of ecology is understanding consequences."
    The voice shocked him because he recognized it and knew the owner of it was dead. It was the voice of his father who had been planetologist here before him--his father long dead, killed in the cave-in at Plaster Basin.
    "Got yourself into quite a fix here, Son," his father said. "You should've known the consequences of trying to help the child of that Duke." 
    I'm delirious, Kynes thought.
    The voice seemed to come from his right. Kynes scraped his face through sand, turning to look in that direction--nothing except a curving stretch of dune dancing with heat devils in the full glare of the sun.
    "The more life there is within a system, the more niches there are for life," his father said. And the voice came now from his left, from behind him.
    Why does he keep moving around? Kynes asked himself. Doesn't he want me to see him?
    "Life improves the capacity of the environment to sustain life," his father said. "Life makes needed nutrients more readily available. It binds more energy into the system through the tremendous chemical interplay from organism to organism." 
    Why does he keep harping on the same subject? Kynes asked himself. I knew that before I was ten.
    Desert hawks, carrion-eaters in this land as were most wild creatures, began to circle over him. Kynes saw a shadow pass near his hand, forced his head farther around to look upward. The birds were a blurred patch on silver-blue sky--distant flecks of soot floating above him.
    "We are generalists," his father said. "You can't draw neat lines around planet-wide problems. Planetology is a cut-and-fit science."
    What's he trying to tell me? Kynes wondered. Is there some consequence I failed to see?
    His cheek slumped back against the hot sand, and he smelled the burned rock odor beneath the pre-spice gasses. From some corner of logic in his mind, a thought formed: Those are carrion-eater birds over me. Perhaps some of my Fremen will see them and come to investigate.
    "To the working planetologist, his most important tool is human beings," his father said. "You must cultivate ecological, literacy among the people. That's why I've created this entirely new form of ecological notation."
    He's repeating things he said to me when I was a child, Kynes thought.
    He began to feel cool, but that corner of logic in his mind told him: The sun is overhead. You have no stillsuit and you're hot; the sun is burning the moisture out of your body. 
    His fingers clawed feebly at the sand. 
    They couldn't even leave me a stillsuit!
    "The presence of moisture in the air helps prevent too-rapid evaporation from living bodies," his father said. 
    Why does he keep repeating the obvious? Kynes wondered.
    He tried to think of moisture in the air--grass covering this dune . . . open water somewhere beneath him, a long qanat flowing with water open to the sky except in text illustrations. Open water . . . irrigation water . . . it took five thousand cubic meters of water to irrigate one hectare of land per growing season, he remembered.
    "Our first goal on Arrakis," his father said, "is grassland provinces. We will start with these mutated poverty grasses. When we have moisture locked in grasslands, we'll move on to start upland forests, then a few open bodies of water--small at first--and situated along lines of prevailing winds with windtrap moisture precipitators spaced in the lines to recapture what the wind steals. We must create a true sirocco--a moist wind--but we will never get away from the necessity for windtraps."
    Always lecturing me, Kynes thought. Why doesn't he shut up? Can't he see I'm dying?
    "You will die, too," his father said, "if you don't get off the bubble that's forming right now deep underneath you. It's there and you know it. You can smell the pre-spice gasses. You know the little makers are beginning to lose some of their water into the mass." 
    The thought of that water beneath him was maddening. He imagined it now--sealed off in strata of porous rock by the leathery half-plant, half-animal little makers--and the thin rupture that was pouring a cool stream of clearest, pure, liquid, soothing water into . . . 
    A pre-spice mass!
    He inhaled, smelling the rank sweetness. The odor was much richer around him than it had been.
    Kynes pushed himself to his knees, heard a bird screech, the hurried flapping of wings.
    This is spice desert, he thought. There must be Fremen about even in the day sun. Surely they can see the birds and will investigate.
    "Movement across the landscape is a necessity for animal life," his father said. "Nomad peoples follow the same necessity. Lines of movement adjust to physical needs for water, food, minerals. We must control this movement now, align it for our purposes." 
    "Shut up, old man," Kynes muttered.
    "We must do a thing on Arrakis never before attempted for an entire planet," his father said. "We must use man as a constructive ecological force--inserting adapted terraform life: a plant here, an animal there, a man in that place--to transform the water cycle, to build a new kind of landscape." 
    "Shut up!" Kynes croaked.
    "It was lines of movement that gave us the first clue to the relationship between worms and spice," his father said.
    A worm, Kynes thought with a surge of hope. A maker's sure to come when this bubble bursts. But I have no hooks. How can I mount a big maker without hooks?
    He could feel frustration sapping what little strength remained to him. Water so near--only a hundred meters or so beneath him; a worm sure to come, but no way to trap it on the surface and use it.
    Kynes pitched forward onto the sand, returning to the shallow depression his movements had defined. He felt sand hot against his left cheek, but the sensation was remote.
    "The Arrakeen environment built itself into the evolutionary pattern of native life forms," his father said. "How strange that so few people ever looked up from the spice long enough to wonder at the near-ideal nitrogen-oxygen-CO2 balance being maintained here in the absence of large areas of plant cover. The energy sphere of the planet is there to see and understand--a relentless process, but a process nonetheless. There is a gap in it? Then something occupies that gap. Science is made up of so many things that appear obvious after they are explained. I knew the little maker was there, deep in the sand, long before I ever saw it." 
    "Please stop lecturing me, Father," Kynes whispered.
    A hawk landed on the sand near his outstretched hand. Kynes saw it fold its wings, tip its head to stare at him. He summoned the energy to croak at it. The bird hopped away two steps, but continued to stare at him.
    "Men and their works have been a disease on the surface of their planets before now," his father said. "Nature tends to compensate for diseases, to remove or encapsulate them, to incorporate them into the system in her own way."
    The hawk lowered its head, stretched its wings, refolded them. It transferred its attention to his outstretched hand.
    Kynes found that he no longer had the strength to croak at it.
    "The historical system of mutual pillage and extortion stops here on Arrakis," his father said. "You cannot go on forever stealing what you need without regard to those who come after. The physical qualities of a planet are written into its economic and political record. We have the record in front of us and our course is obvious."
    He never could stop lecturing, Kynes thought. Lecturing, lecturing, lecturing--always lecturing.
    The hawk hopped one step closer to Kynes' outstretched hand, turned its head first one way and then the other to study the exposed flesh.
    "Arrakis is a one-crop planet," his father said. "One crop. It supports a ruling class that lives as ruling classes have lived in all times while, beneath them, a semihuman mass of semislaves exists on the leavings. It's the masses and the leavings that occupy our attention. These are far more valuable than has ever been suspected." 
    "I'm ignoring you, Father," Kynes whispered. "Go away." 
    And he thought: Surely there must be some of my Fremen near. They cannot help but see the birds over me. They will investigate if only to see if there's moisture available.
    "The masses of Arrakis will know that we work to make the land flow with water," his father said. "Most of them, of course, will have only a semimystical understanding of how we intend to do this. Many, not understanding the prohibitive mass-ratio problem, may even think we'll bring water from some other planet rich in it. Let them think anything they wish as long as they believe in us." 
    In a minute I'll get up and tell him what I think of him, Kynes thought. Standing there lecturing me when he should be helping me.
    The bird took another hop closer to Kynes' outstretched hand. Two more hawks drifted down to the sand behind it.
    "Religion and law among our masses must be one and the same," his father said. "An act of disobedience must be a sin and require religious penalties. This will have the dual benefit of bringing both greater obedience and greater bravery. We must depend not so much on the bravery of individuals, you see, as upon the bravery of a whole population."
    Where is my population now when I need it most? Kynes thought. He summoned all his strength, moved his hand a finger's width toward the nearest hawk. It hopped backward among its companions and all stood poised for flight.
    "Our timetable, will achieve the stature of a natural phenomenon," his father said. "A planet's life is a vast, tightly interwoven fabric. Vegetation and animal changes will be determined at first by the raw physical forces we manipulate. As they establish themselves, though, our changes will become controlling influences in their own right--and we will have to deal with them, too. Keep in mind, though, that we need control only three per cent of the energy surface--only three per cent--to tip the entire structure over into our self-sustaining system."
    Why aren't you helping we? Kynes wondered. Always the same: when I need you most, you fail me. He wanted to turn his head, to stare in the direction of his father's voice, stare the old man down. Muscles refused to answer his demand.
    Kynes saw the hawk move. It approached his hand, a cautious step at a time while its companions waited in mock indifference. The hawk stopped only a hop away from his hand.
    A profound clarity filled Kynes' mind. He saw quite suddenly a potential for Arrakis that his father had never seen. The possibilities along that different path flooded through him.
    "No more terrible disaster could befall your people than for them to fall into the hands of a Hero," his father said. 
    Reading my mind! Kynes thought. Well . . . let him.
    The messages already have been sent to my sietch villages, he thought. Nothing can stop them. If the Duke's son is alive they'll find him and protect him as I have commanded. They may discard the woman, his mother, but they'll save the boy.
    The hawk took one hop that brought it within slashing distance of his hand. It tipped its head to examine the supine flesh. Abruptly, it straightened, stretched its head upward and with a single screech, leaped into the air and banked away overhead with its companions behind it.
    They've come! Kynes thought. My Fremen have found me! 
    Then he heard the sand rumbling.
    Every Fremen knew the sound, could distinguish it immediately from the noises of worms or other desert life. Somewhere beneath him, the pre-spice mass had accumulated enough water and organic matter from the little makers, had reached the critical stage of wild growth. A gigantic bubble of carbon dioxide was forming deep in the sand, heaving upward in an enormous "blow" with a dust whirlpool at its center. It would exchange what had been formed deep in the sand for whatever lay on the surface.
    The hawks circled overhead screeching their frustration. They knew what was happening. Any desert creature would know.
    And I am a desert creature, Kynes thought. You see me, Father? I am a desert creature.
    He felt the bubble lift him, felt it break and the dust whirlpool engulf him, dragging him down into cool darkness. For a moment, the sensation of coolness and the moisture were blessed relief. Then, as his planet killed him, it occurred to Kynes that his father and all the other scientists were wrong, that the most persistent principles of the universe were accident and error.
    Even the hawks could appreciate these facts.

= = = = = =

Prophecy and prescience--How can they be put to the test in the face of the unanswered questions? Consider: How much is actual prediction of the "waveform" (as Muad'Dib referred to his vision-image) and how much is the prophet shaping the future to fit the prophecy? What of the harmonics inherent in the act of prophecy? Does the prophet see the future or does he see a line of weakness, a fault or cleavage that he may shatter with words or decisions as a diamond-cutter shatters his gem with a blow of a knife?

-"Private Reflections on Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    "Get their water," the man calling out of the night had said. And Paul fought down his fear, glanced at his mother. His trained eyes saw her readiness for battle, the waiting whipsnap of her muscles.
    "It would be regrettable should we have to destroy you out of hand," the voice above them said.
    That's the one who spoke to us first, Jessica thought. There are at least two of them--one to our right and one on our left.
    "Cignoro hrobosa sukares hin mange la pchagavas doi me kamavas na beslas lele pal hrobas!" 
    It was the man to their right calling out across the basin.
    To Paul, the words were gibberish, but out of her Bene Gesserit training, Jessica recognized the speech. It was Chakobsa, one of the ancient hunting languages, and the man above them was saying that perhaps these were the strangers they sought.
    In the sudden silence that followed the calling voice, the hoop-wheel face of the second moon--faintly ivory blue--rolled over the rocks across the basin, bright and peering.
    Scrambling sounds came from the rocks--above and to both sides . . . dark motions in the moonlight. Many figures flowed through the shadows.
    A whole troop! Paul thought with a sudden pang.
    A tall man in a mottled burnoose stepped in front of Jessica. His mouth baffle was thrown aside for clear speech, revealing a heavy beard in the sidelight of the moon, but face and eyes were hidden in the overhang of his hood.
    "What have we here--jinn or human?" he asked.
    And Jessica heard the true-banter in his voice, she allowed herself a faint hope. This was the voice of command, the voice that had first shocked them with its intrusion from the night. 
    "Human, I warrant," the man said.
    Jessica sensed rather than saw the knife hidden in a fold of the man's robe. She permitted herself one bitter regret that she and Paul had no shields.
    "Do you also speak?" the man asked.
    Jessica put all the royal arrogance at her command into her manner and voice. Reply was urgent, but she had not heard enough of this man to be certain she had a register on his culture and weaknesses.
    "Who comes on us like criminals out of the night?" she demanded.
    The burnoose-hooded head showed tension in a sudden twist, then slow relaxation that revealed much. The man had good control.
    Paul shifted away from his mother to separate them as targets and give each of them a clearer arena of action.
    The hooded head turned at Paul's movement, opening a wedge of face to moonlight. Jessica saw a sharp nose, one glinting eye--dark, so dark the eye, without any white in it--a heavy brown and upturned mustache.
    "A likely cub," the man said. "If you're fugitives from the Harkonnens, it may be you're welcome among us. What is it, boy?"
    The possibilities flashed through Paul's mind: A trick? A fact? Immediate decision was needed.
    "Why should you welcome fugitives?" he demanded.
    "A child who thinks and speaks like a man," the tall man said. "Well, now, to answer your question, my young wali, I am one who does not pay the fai, the water tribute, to the Harkonnens. That is why I might welcome a fugitive."
    He knows who we are, Paul thought. There's concealment in his voice.
    "I am Stilgar, the Fremen," the tall man said. "Does that speed your tongue, boy?"
    It is the same voice, Paul thought. And he remembered the Council with this man seeking the body of a friend slain by the Harkonnens.
    "I know you, Stilgar," Paul said. "I was with my father in Council when you came for the water of your friend. You took away with you my father's man, Duncan Idaho--an exchange of friends." 
    "And Idaho abandoned us to return to his Duke," Stilgar said.
    Jessica heard the shading of disgust in his voice, held herself prepared for attack.
    The voice from the rocks above them called: "We waste time here, Stil."
    "This is the Duke's son," Stilgar barked. "He's certainly the one Liet told us to seek." 
    "But . . . a child, Stil."
    "The Duke was a man and this lad used a thumper," Stilgar said. "That was a brave crossing he made in the path of shai-hulud. " 
    And Jessica heard him excluding her from his thoughts. Had he already passed sentence?
    "We haven't time for the test," the voice above them protested. 
    "Yet he could be the Lisan al-Gaib," Stilgar said. 
    He's looking for an omen! Jessica thought. 
    "But the woman," the voice above them said. 
    Jessica readied herself anew. There had been death in that voice. 
    "Yes, the woman," Stilgar said. "And her water." 
    "You know the law," said the voice from the rocks. "Ones who cannot live with the desert--" 
    "Be quiet," Stilgar said. "Times change." 
    "Did Liet command this?" asked the voice from the rocks.
    "You heard the voice of the cielago, Jamis," Stilgar said. "Why do you press me?"
    And Jessica thought: Cielago! the clue of the tongue opened wide avenues of understanding: this was the language of Ilm and Fiqh, and cielago meant bat, a small flying mammal. Voice of the cielago: they had received a distrans message to seek Paul and herself.
    "I but remind you of your duties, friend Stilgar," said the voice above them.
    "My duty is the strength of the tribe," Stilgar said. "That is my only duty. I need no one to remind me of it. This child-man interests me. He is full-fleshed. He has lived on much water. He has lived away from the father sun. He has not the eyes of the ibad. Yet he does not speak or act like a weakling of the pans. Nor did his father. How can this be?"
    "We cannot stay out here all night arguing," said the voice from the rocks. "If a patrol--" 
    "I will not tell you again, Jamis, to be quiet," Stilgar said.
    The man above them remained silent, but Jessica heard him moving, crossing by a leap over a defile and working his way down to the basin floor on their left.
    "The voice of the cielago suggested there'd be value to us in saving you two," Stilgar said. "I can see possibility in this strong boy-man: he is young and can learn. But what of yourself, woman?" He stared at Jessica.
    I have his voice and pattern registered now, Jessica thought. I could control him with a word, but he's a strong man . . . worth much more to us unblunted and with full freedom of action. We shall see.
    "I am the mother of this boy," Jessica said. "In part, his strength which you admire is the product of my training."
    "The strength of a woman can be boundless," Stilgar said. "Certain it is in a Reverend Mother. Are you a Reverend Mother?" 
    For the moment, Jessica put aside the implications of the question, answered truthfully, "No." 
    "Are you trained in the ways of the desert?" 
    "No, but many consider my training valuable." 
    "We make our own judgments on value," Stilgar said. 
    "Every man has the right to his own judgments," she said.
    "It is well that you see the reason," Stilgar said. "We cannot dally here to test you, woman. Do you understand? We'd not want your shade to plague us. I will take the boy-man, your son, and he shall have my countenance, sanctuary in my tribe. But for you, woman--you understand there is nothing personal in this? It is the rule, Istislah, in the general interest. Is that not enough?" 
    Paul took a half-step forward. "What are you talking about?" 
    Stilgar flicked a glance across Paul, but kept his attention on Jessica. "Unless you've been deep-trained from childhood to live here, you could bring destruction onto an entire tribe. It is the law, and we cannot carry useless . . . "
    Jessica's motion started as a slumping, deceptive faint to the ground. It was the obvious thing for a weak outworlder to do, and the obvious slows an opponent's reactions. It takes an instant to interpret a known thing when that thing is exposed as something unknown. She shifted as she saw his right shoulder drop to bring a weapon within the folds of his robe to bear on her new position. A turn, a slash of her arm, a whirling of mingled robes, and she was against the rocks with the man helpless in front of her.
    At his mother's first movement, Paul backed two steps. As she attacked, he dove for shadows. A bearded man rose up in his path, half-crouched, lunging forward with a weapon in one hand. Paul took the man beneath the sternum with a straight-hand jab, sidestepped and chopped the base of his neck, relieving him of the weapon as he fell.
    Then Paul was into the shadows, scrambling upward among the rocks, the weapon tucked into his waist sash. He had recognized it in spite of its unfamiliar shape--a projectile weapon, and that said many things about this place, another clue that shields were not used here.
    They will concentrate on my mother and that Stilgar fellow. She can handle him. I must get to a safe vantage point where I can threaten them and give her time to escape.
    There came a chorus of sharp spring-clicks from the basin. Projectiles whined off the rocks around him. One of them flicked his robe. He squeezed around a corner in the rocks, found himself in a narrow vertical crack, began inching upward--his back against one side, his feet against the other--slowly, as silently as he could.
    The roar of Stilgar's voice echoed up to him: "Get back, you wormheaded lice! She'll break my neck if you come near!" 
    A voice out of the basin said: "The boy got away, Stil. What are we--"
    "Of course he got away, you sand-brained . . . Ugh-h-h! Easy, woman!" 
    "Tell them to stop hunting my son," Jessica said. 
    "They've stopped, woman. He got away as you intended him to. Great gods below! Why didn't you say you were a weirding woman and a fighter?"
    "Tell your men to fall back," Jessica said. "Tell them to go out into the basin where I can see them . . . and you'd better believe that I know how many of them there are."
    And she thought: This is the delicate moment, but if this man is as sharp-minded as I think him, we have a chance.
    Paul inched his way upward, found a narrow ledge on which he could rest and look down into the basin. Stilgar's voice came up to him.
    "And if I refuse? How can you . . . ugh-h-h! Leave be, woman! We mean no harm to you, now. Great gods! If you can do this to the strongest of us, you're worth ten times your weight of water." 
    Now, the test of reason, Jessica thought. She said: "You ask after the Lisan al-Gaib."
    "You could be the folk of the legend," he said, "but I'll believe that when it's been tested. All I know now is that you came here with that stupid Duke who . . . Aiee-e-e! Woman! I care not if you kill me! He was honorable and brave, but it was stupid to put himself in the way of the Harkonnen fist!" 
    Silence.
    Presently, Jessica said: "He had no choice, but we'll not argue it. Now, tell that man of yours behind the bush over there to stop trying to bring his weapon to bear on me, or I'll rid the universe of you and take him next." 
    "You there!" Stilgar roared. "Do as she says!" 
    "But, Stil--"
    "Do as she says, you wormfaced, crawling, sand-brained piece of lizard turd! Do it or I'll help her dismember you! Can't you see the worth of this woman?"
    The man at the bush straightened from his partial concealment, lowered his weapon.
    "He has obeyed," Stilgar said.
    "Now," Jessica said, "explain clearly to your people what it is you wish of me. I want no young hothead to make a foolish mistake."
    "When we slip into the villages and towns we must mask our origin, blend with the pan and graben folk," Stilgar said. "We carry no weapons, for the crysknife is sacred. But you, woman, you have the weirding ability of battle. We'd only heard of it and many doubted, but one cannot doubt what he sees with his own eyes. You mastered an armed Fremen. This is a weapon no search could expose."
    There was a stirring in the basin as Stilgar's words sank home. 
    "And if I agree to teach you the . . . weirding way?" 
    "My countenance for you as well as your son." 
    "How can we be sure of the truth in your promise?" 
    Stilgar's voice lost some of its subtle undertone of reasoning, took on an edge of bitterness. "Out here, woman, we carry no paper for contracts. We make no evening promises to be broken at dawn. When a man says a thing, that's the contract. As leader of my people, I've put them in bond to my word. Teach us this weirding way and you have sanctuary with us as long as you wish. Your water shall mingle with our water." 
    "Can you speak for all Fremen?" Jessica asked.
    "In time, that may be. But only my brother, Liet, speaks for all Fremen. Here, I promise only secrecy. My people will not speak of you to any other sietch. The Harkonnens have returned to Dune in force and your Duke is dead. It is said that you two died in a Mother storm. The hunter does not seek dead game."
    There's safety in that, Jessica thought. But these people have good communications and a message could be sent. 
    "I presume there was a reward offered for us," she said.
    Stilgar remained silent, and she could almost see the thoughts turning over in his head, sensing the shifts of his muscles beneath her hands.
    Presently, he said: "I will say it once more: I've given the tribe's word-bond. My people know your worth to us now. What could the Harkonnens give us? Our freedom? Hah! no, you are the taqwa, that which buys us more than all the spice in the Harkonnen coffers."
    "Then I shall teach you my way of battle," Jessica said, and she sensed the unconscious ritual-intensity of her own words. 
    "Now, will you release me?"
    "So be it," Jessica said. She released her hold on him, stepped aside in full view of the bank in the basin. This is the test-mashed, she thought. But Paul must know about them even if I die for his knowledge.
    In the waiting silence, Paul inched forward to get a better view of where his mother stood. As he moved, he heard heavy breathing, suddenly stilled, above him in the vertical crack of the rock, and sensed a faint shadow there outlined against the stars.
    Stilgar's voice came up from the basin: "You, up there! Stop hunting the boy. He'll come down presently."
    The voice of a young boy or a girl sounded from the darkness above Paul: "But, Stil, he can't be far from--"
    "I said leave him be, Chani! You spawn of a lizard!" 
    There came a whispered imprecation from above Paul and a low voice: "Call me spawn of a lizard!" But the shadow pulled back out of view.
    Paul returned his attention to the basin, picking out the gray-shadowed movement of Stilgar beside his mother.
    "Come in, all of you," Stilgar called. He turned to Jessica. "And now I'll ask you how we may be certain you'll fulfill your half of our bargain? You're the one's lived with papers and empty contracts and such as--"
    "We of the Bene Gesserit don't break our vows any more than you do," Jessica said.
    There was a protracted silence, then a multiple hissing of voices: "A Bene Gesserit witch!"
    Paul brought his captured weapon from his sash, trained it on the dark figure of Stilgar, but the man and his companions remained immobile, staring at Jessica. 
    "It is the legend," someone said.
    "It was said that the Shadout Mapes gave this report on you," Stilgar said. "But a thing so important must be tested. If you are the Bene Gesserit of the legend whose son will lead us to paradise . . . " He shrugged.
    Jessica sighed, thinking: So our Missionaria Protectiva even planted religious safety valves all through this hell hole. Ah, well . . . it'll help, and that's what it was meant to do.
    She said: "The seeress who brought you the legend, she gave it under the binding of karama and ijaz, the miracle and the inimitability of the prophecy--this I know. Do you wish a sign?"
    His nostrils flared in the moonlight. "We cannot tarry for the rites," he whispered.
    Jessica recalled a chart Kynes had shown her while arranging emergency escape routes. How long ago it seemed. There had been a place called "Sietch Tabr" on the chart and beside it the notation: "Stilgar." 
    "Perhaps when we get to Sietch Tabr," she said.
    The revelation shook him, and Jessica thought: If only he knew the tricks we use! She must've been good, that Bene Gesserit of the Missionaria Protectiva. These Fremen are beautifully prepared to believe in us.
    Stilgar shifted uneasily. "We must go now." 
    She nodded, letting him know that they left with her permission. 
    He looked up at the cliff almost directly at the rock ledge where Paul crouched. "You there, lad: you may come down now." He returned his attention to Jessica, spoke with an apologetic tone: "Your son made an incredible amount of noise climbing. He has much to learn lest he endanger us all, but he's young." 
    "No doubt we have much to teach each other," Jessica said. "Meanwhile, you'd best see to your companion out there. My noisy son was a bit rough in disarming him." 
    Stilgar whirled, his hood flapping. "Where?" 
    "Beyond those bushes." She pointed.
    Stilgar touched two of his men. "See to it." He glanced at his companions, identifying them. "Jamis is missing." He turned to Jessica. "Even your cub knows the weirding way." 
    "And you'll notice that my son hasn't stirred from up there as you ordered," Jessica said.
    The two men Stilgar had sent returned supporting a third who stumbled and gasped between them. Stilgar gave them a flicking glance, returned his attention to Jessica. "The son will take only your orders, eh? Good. He knows discipline." 
    "Paul, you may come down now," Jessica said.
    Paul stood up, emerging into moonlight above his concealing cleft, slipped the Fremen weapon back into his sash. As he turned, another figure arose from the rocks to face him.
    In the moonlight and reflection off gray stone, Paul saw a small figure in Fremen robes, a shadowed face peering out at him from the hood, and the muzzle of one of the projectile weapons aimed at him from a fold of robe.
    "I am Chani, daughter of Liet." 
    The voice was lilting, half filled with laughter.
    "I would not have permitted you to harm my companions," she said.
    Paul swallowed. The figure in front of him turned into the moon's path and he saw an elfin face, black pits of eyes. The familiarity of that face, the features out of numberless visions in his earliest prescience, shocked Paul to stillness. He remembered the angry bravado with which he had once described this face-from-a-dream, telling the Reverend Mother Gains Helen Mohiam: "I will meet her." 
    And here was the face, but in no meeting he had ever dreamed.
    "You were as noisy as shai-hulud in a rage," she said. "And you took the most difficult way up here. Follow me; I'll show you an easier way down."
    He scrambled out of the cleft, followed the swirling of her robe across a tumbled landscape. She moved like a gazelle, dancing over the rocks. Paul felt hot blood in his face, was thankful for the darkness.
    That girl! She was like a touch of destiny. He felt caught up on a wave, in tune with a motion that lifted all his spirits. 
    They stood presently amidst the Fremen on the basin floor.
    Jessica turned a wry smile on Paul, but spoke to Stilgar: "This will be a good exchange of teachings. I hope you and your people feel no anger at our violence. It seemed . . . necessary. You were about to . . . make a mistake."
    "To save one from a mistake is a gift of paradise," Stilgar said. He touched his lips with his left hand, lifted the weapon from Paul's waist with the other, tossed it to a companion. "You will have your own maula pistol, lad, when you've earned it."
    Paul started to speak, hesitated, remembering his mother's teaching: "Beginnings are such delicate times. "
    "My son has what weapons he needs," Jessica said. She stared at Stilgar, forcing him to think of how Paul had acquired the pistol.
    Stilgar glanced at the man Paul had subdued--Jamis. The man stood at one side, head lowered, breathing heavily. "You are a difficult woman," Stilgar said. He held out his left hand to a companion, snapped his fingers. "Kushti bakka te." 
    More Chakobsa, Jessica thought.
    The companion pressed two squares of gauze into Stilgar's hand. Stilgar ran them through his fingers, fixed one around Jessica's neck beneath her hood, fitted the other around Paul's neck in the same way.
    "Now you wear the kerchief of the bakka," he said. "If we become separated, you will be recognized as belonging to Stilgar's sietch. We will talk of weapons another time."
    He moved out through his band now, inspecting them, giving Paul's Fremkit pack to one of his men to carry.
    Bakka, Jessica thought, recognizing the religious term: bakka--the weeper. She sensed how the symbolism of the kerchiefs united this band. Why should weeping unite them? she asked herself.
    Stilgar came to the young girl who had embarrassed Paul, said: "Chani, take the child-man under your wing. Keep him out of trouble." 
    Chani touched Paul's arm. "Come along, child-man." 
    Paul hid the anger in his voice, said: "My name is Paul. It were well you--"
    "We'll give you a name, manling," Stilgar said, "in the time of the mihna, at the test of aql."
    The test of reason, Jessica translated. The sudden need of Paul's ascendancy overrode all other consideration, and she barked, "My son's been tested with the gom jabbar!"
    In the stillness that followed, she knew she had struck to the heart of them.
    "There's much we don't know of each other," Stilgar said. "But we tarry overlong. Day-sun mustn't find us in the open." He crossed to the man Paul had struck down, said, "Jamis, can you travel?"
    A grunt answered him. "Surprised me, he did. 'Twas an accident. I can travel."
    "No accident," Stilgar said. "I'll hold you responsible with Chani for the lad's safety, Jamis. These people have my countenance."
    Jessica stared at the man, Jamis. His was the voice that had argued with Stilgar from the rocks. His was the voice with death in it. And Stilgar had seen fit to reinforce his order with this Jamis.
    Stilgar flicked a testing glance across the group, motioned two men out. "Larus and Farrukh, you are to hide our tracks. See that we leave no trace. Extra care--we have two with us who've not been trained." He turned, hand upheld and aimed across the basin. "In squad line with flankers--move out. We must be at Cave of the Ridges before dawn."
    Jessica fell into step beside Stilgar, counting heads. There were forty Fremen--she and Paul made it forty-two. And she thought: They travel as a military company--even the girl, Chani.
    Paul took a place in the line behind Chani. He had put down the black feeling at being caught by the girl. In his mind now was the memory called up by his mother's barked reminder: "My son's been tested with the gom jabbar!" He found that his hand tingled with remembered pain.
    "Watch where you go," Chani hissed. "Do not brush against a bush lest you leave a thread to show our passage." 
    Paul swallowed, nodded.
    Jessica listened to the sounds of the troop, hearing her own footsteps and Paul's, marveling at the way the Fremen moved. They were forty people crossing the basin with only the sounds natural to the place--ghostly feluccas, their robes flitting through the shadows. Their destination was Sietch Tabr--Stilgar's sietch.
    She turned the word over in her mind; sietch. It was a Chakobsa word, unchanged from the old hunting language out of countless centuries. Sietch: a meeting place in time of danger. The profound implications of the word and the language were just beginning to register with her after the tension of their encounter.
    "We move well," Stilgar said. "With, Shai-hulud's favor, we'll reach Cave of the Ridges before dawn."
    Jessica nodded, conserving her strength, sensing the terrible fatigue she held at bay by force of will . . . and, she admitted it: by the force of elation. Her mind focused on the value of this troop, seeing what was revealed here about the Fremen culture.
    All of them, she thought, an entire culture trained to military order. What a priceless thing is here for an outcast Duke!

= = = = = =

The Fremen were supreme in that quality the ancients called "spannungsbogen"--which is the self-imposed delay between desire for a thing and the act of reaching out to grasp that thing.
-from "The Wisdom of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    They approached Cave of the Ridges at dawnbreak, moving through a split in the basin wall so narrow they had to turn sideways to negotiate it. Jessica saw Stilgar detach guards in the thin dawnlight, saw them for a moment as they began their scrambling climb up the cliff.
    Paul turned his head upward as he walked, seeing the tapestry of this planet cut in cross section where the narrow cleft gaped toward gray-blue sky.
    Chani pulled at his robe to hurry him, said: "Quickly. It is already light."
    "The men who climbed above us, where are they going?" Paul whispered.
    "The first daywatch," she said. "Hurry now!" 
    A guard left outside, Paul thought. Wise. But it would've been wiser still for us to approach this place in separate bands. Less chance of losing the whole troop. He paused in the thought, realizing that this was guerrilla thinking, and he remembered his father's fear that the Atreides might become a guerrilla house. 
    "Faster," Chani whispered.
    Paul sped his steps, hearing the swish of robes behind. And he thought of the words of the sirat from Yueh's tiny 0.C. Bible.
    "Paradise on my right, Hell on my left and the Angel of Death behind." He rolled the quotation in his mind.
    They rounded a corner where the passage widened. Stilgar stood at one side motioning them into a low hole that opened at right angles.
    "Quickly!" he hissed. "We're like rabbits in a cage if a patrol catches us here."
    Paul bent for the opening, followed Chani into a cave illuminated by thin gray light from somewhere ahead. 
    "You can stand up," she said.
    He straightened, studied the place: a deep and wide area with domed ceiling that curved away just out of a man's handreach. The troop spread out through shadows. Paul saw his mother come up on one side, saw her examine their companions. And he noted how she failed to blend with the Fremen even though her garb was identical. The way she moved--such a sense of power and grace.
    "Find a place to rest and stay out of the way, child-man," Chani said. "Here's food." She pressed two leaf-wrapped morsels into his hand. They reeked of spice.
    Stilgar came up behind Jessica, called an order to a group on the left. "Get the doorseal in place and see to moisture security." He turned to another Fremen: "Lemil, get glowglobes." He took Jessica's arm. "I wish to show you something, weirding woman." He led her around a curve of rock toward the light source.
    Jessica found herself looking out across the wide lip of another opening to the cave, an opening high in a cliff wall--looking out across another basin about ten or twelve kilometers wide. The basin was shielded by high rock walls. Sparse clumps of plant growth were scattered around it.
    As she looked at the dawn-gray basin, the sun lifted over the far escarpment illuminating a biscuit-colored landscape of rocks and sand. And she noted how the sun of Arrakis appeared to leap over the horizon.
    It's because we want to hold it back, she thought. Night is safer than day. There came over her then a longing for a rainbow in this place that would never see rain. I must suppress such longings, she thought. They're a weakness. I no longer can afford weaknesses.
    Stilgar gripped her arm, pointed across the basin. "There! There you see proper Druses."
    She looked where he pointed, saw movement: people on the basin floor scattering at the daylight into the shadows of the opposite cliffwall. In spite of the distance, their movements were plain in the clear air. She lifted her binoculars from beneath her robe, focused the oil lenses on the distant people. Kerchiefs fluttered like a flight of multicolored butterflies.
    "That is home," Stilgar said. "We will be there this night." He stared across the basin, tugging at his mustache. "My people stayed out overlate working. That means there are no patrols about. I'll signal them later and they'll prepare for us."
    "Your people show good discipline," Jessica said. She lowered the binoculars, saw that Stilgar was looking at them.
    "They obey the preservation of the tribe," he said. "It is the way we choose among us for a leader. The leader is the one who is strongest, the one who brings water and security." He lifted his attention to her face.
    She returned his stare, noted the whiteless eyes, the stained eyepits, the dust-rimmed beard and mustache, the line of the catchtube curving down from his nostrils into his stillsuit.
    "Have I compromised your leadership by besting you, Stilgar?" she asked.
    "You did not call me out," he said.
    "It's important that a leader keep the respect of his troop," she said.
    "Isn't a one of those sandlice I cannot handle," Stilgar said. "When you bested me, you bested us all. Now, they hope to learn from you . . . the weirding way . . . and some are curious to see if you intend to call me out."
    She weighed the implications. "By besting you in formal battle?"
    He nodded. "I'd advise you against this because they'd not follow you. You're not of the sand. They saw this in our night's passage." 
    "Practical people," she said.
    "True enough." He glanced at the basin. "We know our needs. But not many are thinking deep thoughts now this close to home. We've been out overlong arranging to deliver our spice quota to the free traders for the cursed Guild . . . may their faces be forever black."
    Jessica stopped in the act of turning away from him, looked back up into his face. "The Guild? What has the Guild to do with your spice?"
    "It's Liet's command," Stilgar said. "We know the reason, but the taste of it sours us. We bribe the Guild with a monstrous payment in spice to keep our skies clear of satellites and such that none may spy what we do to the face of Arrakis." 
    She weighed out her words, remembering that Paul had said this must be the reason Arrakeen skies were clear of satellites. "And what is it you do to the face of Arrakis that must not be seen?"
    "We change it . . . slowly but with certainty . . . to make it fit for human life. Our generation will not see it, nor our children nor our children's children nor the grandchildren of their children . . . but it will come." He stared with veiled eyes out over the basin. "Open water and tall green plants and people walking freely without stillsuits."
    So that's the dream of this Liet-Kynes, she thought. And she said: "Bribes are dangerous; they have a way of growing larger and larger."
    "They grow," he said, "but the slow way is the safe way." 
    Jessica turned, looked out over the basin, trying to see it the way Stilgar was seeing it in his imagination. She saw only the grayed mustard stain of distant rocks and a sudden hazy motion in the sky above the cliffs.
    "Ah-h-h-h," Stilgar said.
    She thought at first it must be a patrol vehicle, then realized it was a mirage--another landscape hovering over the desert-sand and a distant wavering of greenery and in the middle distance a long worm traveling the surface with what looked like Fremen robes fluttering on its back.
    The mirage faded.
    "It would be better to ride," Stilgar said, "but we cannot permit a maker into this basin. Thus, we must walk again tonight." 
    Maker--their word for worm, she thought.
    She measured the import of his words, the statement that they could not permit a worm into this basin. She knew what she had seen in the mirage--Fremen riding on the back of a giant worm. It took heavy control not to betray her shock at the implications.
    "We must be getting back to the others," Stilgar said. "Else my people may suspect I dally with you. Some already are jealous that my hands tasted your loveliness when we struggled last night in Tuono Basin." 
    "That will be enough of that!" Jessica snapped.
    "No offense," Stilgar said, and his voice was mild. "Women among us are not taken against their will . . . and with you . . . " He shrugged. ". . . even that convention isn't required."
    "You will keep in mind that I was a duke's lady," she said, but her voice was calmer.
    "As you wish," he said. "It's time to seal off this opening, to permit relaxation of stillsuit discipline. My people need to rest in comfort this day. Their families will give them little rest on the morrow."
    Silence fell between them.
    Jessica stared out into the sunlight. She had heard what she had heard in Stilgar's voice--the unspoken offer of more than his countenance. Did he need a wife? She realized she could step into that place with him. It would be one way to end conflict over tribal leadership--female properly aligned with male.
    But what of Paul then? Who could tell yet what rules of parenthood prevailed here? And what of the unborn daughter she had carried these few weeks? What of a dead Duke's daughter? And she permitted herself to face fully the significance of this other child growing within her, to see her own motives in permitting the conception. She knew what it was--she had succumbed to that profound drive shared by all creatures who are faced with death--the drive to seek immortality through progeny. The fertility drive of the species had overpowered them.
    Jessica glanced at Stilgar, saw that he was studying her, waiting. A daughter born here to a woman wed to such a one as this man--what would be the fate of such a daughter? she asked herself. Would he try to limit the necessities that a Bene Gesserit must follow?
    Stilgar cleared his throat and revealed then that he understood some of the questions in her mind. "What is important for a leader is that which makes him a leader. It is the needs of his people. If you teach me your powers, there may come a day when one of us must challenge the other. I would prefer some alternative." 
    "There are several alternatives?" she asked.
    "The Sayyadina," he said. "Our Reverend Mother is old." 
    Their Reverend Mother!
    Before she could probe this, he said: "I do not necessarily offer myself as mate. This is nothing personal, for you are beautiful and desirable. But should you become one of my women, that might lead some of my young men to believe that I'm too much concerned with pleasures of the flesh and not enough concerned with the tribe's needs. Even now they listen to us and watch us." 
    A man who weighs his decisions, who thinks of consequences, she thought.
    "There are those among my young men who have reached the age of wild spirits," he said. "They must be eased through this period. I must leave no great reasons around for them to challenge me. Because I would have to maim and kill among them. This is not the proper course for a leader if it can be avoided with honor. A leader, you see, is one of the things that distinguishes a mob from a people. He maintains the level of individuals. Too few individuals, and a people reverts to a mob."
    His words, the depth of their awareness, the fact that he spoke as much to her as to those who secretly listened, forced her to reevaluate him.
    He has stature, she thought. Where did he learn such inner balance?
    "The law that demands our form of choosing a leader is a just law," Stilgar said. "But it does not follow that justice is always the thing a people needs. What we truly need now is time to grow and prosper, to spread our force over more land."
    What is his ancestry? she wondered. Whence comes such breeding? She said: "Stilgar, I underestimated you." 
    "Such was my suspicion," he said.
    "Each of us apparently underestimated the other," she said.
    "I should like an end to this," he said. "I should like friendship with you . . . and trust. I should like that respect for each other which grows in the breast without demand for the huddlings of sex." 
    "I understand," she said. 
    "Do you trust me?" 
    "I hear your sincerity."
    "Among us," he said, "the Sayyadina, when they are not the formal leaders, hold a special place of honor. They teach. They maintain the strength of God here." He touched his breast.
    Now I must probe this Reverend Mother mystery, she thought. And she said: "You spoke of your Reverend Mother . . . and I've heard words of legend and prophecy."
    "It is said that a Bene Gesserit and her offspring hold the key to our future," he said.
    "Do you believe I am that one."
    She watched his face, thinking; The young reed dies so easily. Beginnings are times of such great peril. 
    "We do not know," he said.
    She nodded, thinking: He's an honorable man. He wants a sign from me, but he'll not tip fate by telling me the sign.
    Jessica turned her head, stared down into the basin at the golden shadows, the purple shadows, the vibrations of dust-mote air across the lip of their cave. Her mind was filled suddenly with feline prudence. She knew the cant of the Missionaria Protectiva, knew how to adapt the techniques of legend and fear and hope to her emergency needs, but she sensed wild changes here . . . as though someone had been in among these Fremen and capitalized on the Missionaria Protectiva's imprint.
    Stilgar cleared his throat.
    She sensed his impatience, knew that the day moved ahead and men waited to seal off this opening. This was a time for boldness on her part, and she realized what she needed: some dar al-hikman, some school of translation that would give her . . . 
    "Adab," she whispered.
    Her mind felt as though it had rolled over within her. She recognized the sensation with a quickening of pulse. Nothing in all the Bene Gesserit training carried such a signal of recognition. It could be only the adab, the demanding memory that comes upon you of itself. She gave herself up to it, allowing the words to flow from her.
    "Ibn qirtaiba," she said, "as far as the spot where the dust ends." She stretched out an arm from her robe, seeing Stilgar's eyes go wide. She heard a rustling of many robes in the background. "I see a . . . Fremen with the book of examples," she intoned. "He reads to al-Lat, the sun whom he defied and subjugated. He reads to the Sadus of the Trial and this is what he reads;

"Mine enemies are like green blades eaten down 
That did stand in the path of the tempest. 
Hast thou not seen what our Lord did? 
He sent the pestilence among them 
That did lay schemes against us.
They are like birds scattered by the huntsman. 
Their schemes are like pellets of poison 
That every mouth rejects."

    A trembling passed through her. She dropped her arm.
    Back to her from the inner cave's shadows came a whispered response of many voices: "Their works have been overturned." 
    "The fire of God mount over thy heart," she said. And she thought: Now, it goes in the proper channel. 
    "The fire of God set alight," came the response. 
    She nodded. "Thine enemies shall fall," she said. 
    "Bi-la kaifa," they answered.
    In the sudden hush, Stilgar bowed to her. "Sayyadina," he said. "If the Shai-hulud grant, then you may yet pass within to become a Reverend Mother."
    Pass within, she thought. An odd way of putting it. But the rest of it fitted into the cant well enough. And she felt a cynical bitterness at what she had done. Our Missionaria Protectiva seldom fails. A place was prepared for us in this wilderness. The prayer of the salat has carved out our hiding place. Now . . . I must play the part of Auliya, the Friend of God . . . Sayyadina to rogue peoples who've been so heavily imprinted with our Bene Gesserit soothsay they even call their chief priestesses Reverend Mothers.
    Paul stood beside Chani in the shadows of the inner cave. He could still taste the morsel she had fed him--bird flesh and grain bound with spice honey and encased in a leaf. In tasting it he had realized he never before had eaten such a concentration of spice essence and there had been a moment of fear. He knew what this essence could do to him--the spice change that pushed his mind into prescient awareness.
    "Bi-la kaifa," Chani whispered.
    He looked at her, seeing the awe with which the Fremen appeared to accept his mother's words. Only the man called Jamis seemed to stand aloof from the ceremony, holding himself apart with arms folded across his breast.
    "Duy yakha bin mange," Chani whispered. "Duy punra bin mange. I have two eyes. I have two feet." 
    And she stared at Paul with a look of wonder.
    Paul took a deep breath, trying to still the tempest within him. His mother's words had locked onto the working of the spice essence, and he had felt her voice rise and fall within him like the shadows of an open fire. Through it all, he had sensed the edge of cynicism in her--he knew her so well!--but nothing could stop this thing that had begun with a morsel of food. 
    Terrible purpose!
    He sensed it, the race consciousness that he could not escape. There was the sharpened clarity, the inflow of data, the cold precision of his awareness. He sank to the floor, sitting with his back against rock, giving himself up to it. Awareness flowed into that timeless stratum where he could view time, sensing the available paths, the winds of the future . . . the winds of the past: the one-eyed vision of the past, the one-eyed vision of the present and the one-eyed vision of the future--all combined in a trinocular vision that permitted him to see time-become-space.
    There was danger, he felt, of overrunning himself, and he had to hold onto his awareness of the present, sensing the blurred deflection of experience, the flowing moment, the continual solidification of that-which-is into the perpetual-was.
    In grasping the present, he felt for the first time the massive steadiness of time's movement everywhere complicated by shifting currents, waves, surges, and countersurges, like surf against rocky cliffs. It gave him a new understanding of his prescience, and he saw the source of blind time, the source of error in it, with an immediate sensation of fear.
    The prescience, he realized, was an illumination that incorporated the limits of what it revealed--at once a source of accuracy and meaningful error. A kind of Heisenberg indeterminacy intervened: the expenditure of energy that revealed what he saw, changed what he saw.
    And what he saw was a time nexus within this cave, a boiling of possibilities focused here, wherein the most minute action--the wink of an eye, a careless word, a misplaced grain of sand--moved a gigantic lever across the known universe. He saw violence with the outcome subject to so many variables that his slightest movement created vast shiftings in the pattern.
    The vision made him want to freeze into immobility, but this, too, was action with its consequences.
    The countless consequences--lines fanned out from this cave, and along most of these consequence-lines he saw his own dead body with blood flowing from a gaping knife wound.

= = = = = =

My father, the Padishah Emperor, was 72 yet looked no more than 35 the year he encompassed the death of Duke Leto and gave Arrakis back to the Harkonnens. He seldom appeared in public wearing other than a Sardaukar uniform and a Burseg's black helmet with the imperial lion in gold upon its crest. The uniform was an open reminder of where his power lay. He was not always that blatant, though. When he wanted, he could radiate charm and sincerity, but I often wonder in these later days if anything about him was as it seemed. I think now he was a man fighting constantly to escape the bars of an invisible cage. You must remember that he was an emperor, father-head of a dynasty that reached back into the dimmest history. But we denied him a legal son. Was this not the most terrible defeat a ruler ever suffered? My mother obeyed her Sister Superiors where the Lady Jessica disobeyed. Which of them was the stronger? History already has answered.
-"In My Father's House" by the Princess Irulan

    Jessica awakened in cave darkness, sensing the stir of Fremen around her, smelling the acrid stillsuit odor. Her inner timesense told her it would soon be night outside, but the cave remained in blackness, shielded from the desert by the plastic hoods that trapped their body moisture within this space.
    She realized that she had permitted herself the utterly relaxing sleep of great fatigue, and this suggested something of her own unconscious assessment on personal security within Stilgar's troop. She turned in the hammock that had been fashioned of her robe, slipped her feet to the rock floor and into her desert boots.
    I must remember to fasten the boots slip-fashion to help my stillsuit's pumping action, she thought. There are so many things to remember.
    She could still taste their morning meal--the morsel of bird flesh and grain bound within a leaf with spice honey--and it came to her that the use of time was turned around here: night was the day of activity and day was the time of rest. 
    Night conceals; night is safest.
    She unhooked her robe from its hammock pegs in a rock alcove, fumbled with the fabric in the dark until she found the top, slipped into it.
    How to get a message out to the Bene Gesserit? she wondered. They would have to be told of the two strays in Arrakeen sanctuary.
    Glowglobes came alight farther into the cave. She saw people moving there, Paul among them already dressed and with his hood thrown back to reveal the aquiline Atreides profile.
    He had acted so strangely before they retired, she thought. Withdrawn. He was like one come back from the dead, not yet fully aware of his return, his eyes half shut and glassy with the inward stare. It made her think of his warning about the spice-impregnated diet: addictive.
    Are there side effects? she wondered. He said it had something to do with his prescient faculty, but he has been strangely silent about what he sees.
    Stilgar came from shadows to her right, crossed to the group beneath the glowglobes. She marked how he fingered his beard and the watchful, cat-stalking look of him.
    Abrupt fear shot through Jessica as her senses awakened to the tensions visible in the people gathered around Paul--the stiff movements, the ritual positions.
    "They have my countenance!" Stilgar rumbled.
    Jessica recognized the man Stilgar confronted--Jamis! She saw then the rage in Jamis--the tight set of his shoulders.
    Jamis, the man Paul bested! she thought. 
    "You know the rule, Stilgar," Jamis said.
    "Who knows it better?" Stilgar asked, and she heard the tone of placation in his voice, the attempt to smooth something over. 
    "I choose the combat," Jamis growled.
    Jessica sped across the cave, grasped Stilgar's arm. "What is this?" she asked.
    "It is the amtal rule," Stilgar said. "Jamis is demanding the right to test your part in the legend."
    "She must be championed," Jamis said. "If her champion wins, that's the truth in it. But it's said . . . " He glanced across the press of people. " . . . that she'd need no champion from the Fremen--which can mean only that she brings her own champion." 
    He's talking of single combat with Paul! Jessica thought.
    She released Stilgar's arm, took a half-step forward. "I'm always my own champion," she said. "The meaning's simple enough for . . . "
    "You'll not tell us our ways!" Jamis snapped. "Not without more proof than I've seen. Stilgar could've told you what to say last morning. He could've filled your mind full of the coddle and you could've bird-talked it to us, hoping to make a false way among us."
    I can take him, Jessica thought, but that might conflict with the way they interpret the legend. And again she wondered at the way the Missionaria Protectiva's work had been twisted on this planet.
    Stilgar looked at Jessica, spoke in a low voice but one designed to carry to the crowd's fringe. "Jamis is one to hold a grudge, Sayyadina. Your son bested him and--"
    "It was an accident!" Jamis roared. "There was witch-force at Tuono Basin and I'll prove it now!"
    " . . . and I've bested him myself," Stilgar continued. "He seeks by this tahaddi challenge to get back at me as well. There's too much of violence in Jamis for him ever to make a good leader--too much ghafla, the distraction. He gives his mouth to the rules and his heart to the sarfa, the turning away. No, he could never make a good leader. I've preserved him this long because he's useful in a fight as such, but when he gets this carving anger on him he's dangerous to his own society." 
    "Stilgar-r-r-r!" Jamis rumbled.
    And Jessica saw what Stilgar was doing, trying to enrage Jamis, to take the challenge away from Paul.
    Stilgar faced Jamis, and again Jessica heard the soothing in the rumbling voice. "Jamis, he's but a boy. He's--"
    "You named him a man," Jamis said. "His mother says he's been through the gom jabbar. He's full-fleshed and with a surfeit of water. The ones who carried their pack say there's literjons of water in it. Literjons! And us sipping our catch-pockets the instant they show dewsparkle."
    Stilgar glanced at Jessica. "Is this true? Is there water in your pack?" 
    "Yes." 
    "Literjons of it?" 
    "Two literjons." 
    "What was intended with this wealth?"
    Wealth? she thought. She shook her head, feeling the coldness in his voice.
    "Where I was born, water fell from the sky and ran over the land in wide rivers," she said. "There were oceans of it so broad you could not see the other shore. I've not been trained to your water discipline. I never before had to think of it this way." 
    A sighing gasp arose from the people around them: "Water fell from the sky . . . it ran over the land."
    "Did you know there're those among us who've lost from their catch-pockets by accident and will be in sore trouble before we reach Tabr this night?"
    "How could I know?" Jessica shook her head. "If they're in need, give them water from our pack." 
    "Is that what you intended with this wealth?" 
    "I intended it to save life," she said. 
    "Then we accept your blessing, Sayyadina."
    "You'll not buy us off with water," Jamis growled. "Nor will you anger me against yourself, Stilgar. I see you trying to make me call you out before I've proved my words,"
    Stilgar faced Jamis. "Are you determined to press this fight against a child, Jamis?" His voice was low, venomous. 
    "She must be championed." 
    "Even though she has my countenance?" 
    "I invoke the amtal rule," Jamis said. "It's my right." 
    Stilgar nodded. "Then, if the boy does not carve you down, you'll answer to my knife afterward. And this time I'll not hold back the blade as I've done before." 
    "You cannot do this thing," Jessica said. "Paul's just--" 
    "You must not interfere, Sayyadina," Stilgar said. "Oh, I know you can take me and, therefore, can take anyone among us, but you cannot best us all united. This must be; it is the amtal rule." 
    Jessica fell silent, staring at him in the green light of the glowglobes, seeing the demoniacal stiffness that had taken over his expression. She shifted her attention to Jamis, saw the brooding look to his brows and thought: I should've seen that before. He broods. He's the silent kind, one who works himself up inside. I should've been prepared.
    "If you harm my son," she said, "You'll have me to meet. I call you out now. I'll carve you into a joint of--"
    "Mother." Paul stepped forward, touched her sleeve. "Perhaps if I explain to Jamis how--" 
    "Explain!" Jamis sneered.
    Paul fell silent, staring at the man. He felt no fear of him. Jamis appeared clumsy in his movements and he had fallen so easily in their night encounter on the sand. But Paul still felt the nexus-boiling of this cave, still remembered the prescient visions of himself dead under a knife. There had been so few avenues of escape for him in that vision . . . 
    Stilgar said: "Sayyadina, you must step back now where--" 
    "Stop calling her Sayyadina!" Jamis said. "That's yet to be proved. So she knows the prayer! What's that? Every child among us knows it."
    He has talked enough, Jessica thought. I've the key to him. I could immobilize him with a word. She hesitated. But I cannot stop them all.
    "You will answer to me then," Jessica said, and she pitched her voice in a twisting tone with a little whine in it and a catch at the end. 
    Jamis stared at her, fright visible on his face.
    "I'll teach you agony," she said in the same tone. "Remember that as you fight. You'll have agony such as will make the gom jabbar a happy memory by comparison. You will writhe with your entire--"
    "She tries a spell on me!" Jamis gasped. He put his clenched right fist beside his ear. "I invoke the silence on her!" 
    "So be it then," Stilgar said. He cast a warning glance at Jessica. "If you speak again, Sayyadina, we'll know it's your witchcraft and you'll be forfeit." He nodded for her to step back.
    Jessica felt hands pulling her, helping her back, and she sensed they were not unkindly. She saw Paul being separated from the throng, the elfin-faced Chani whispering in his ear as she nodded toward Jamis.
    A ring formed within the troop. More glowglobes were brought and all of them tuned to the yellow band.
    Jamis stepped into the ring, slipped out of his robe and tossed it to someone in the crowd. He stood there in a cloudy gray slickness of stillsuit that was patched and marked by tucks and gathers. For a moment, he bent with his mouth to his shoulder, drinking from a catchpocket tube. Presently he straightened, peeled off and detached the suit, handed it carefully into the crowd. He stood waiting, clad in loincloth and some tight fabric over his feet, a crysknife in his right hand.
    Jessica saw the girl-child Chani helping Paul, saw her press a crysknife handle into his palm, saw him heft it, testing the weight and balance. And it came to Jessica that Paul had been trained in prana and bindu, the nerve and the fiber--that he had been taught fighting in a deadly school, his teachers men like Duncan Idaho and Gurney Halleck, men who were legends in their own lifetimes. The boy knew the devious ways of the Bene Gesserit and he looked supple and confident.
    But he's only fifteen, she thought. And he has no shield. I must stop this. Somehow, there must be a way to . . . She looked up, saw Stilgar watching her.
    "You cannot stop it," he said. "You must not speak." 
    She put a hand over her mouth, thinking: I've planted fear in Jamis' mind. It'll slow him some . . . perhaps. If I could only pray--truly pray.
    Paul stood alone now just into the ring, clad in the fighting trunks he'd worn under his stillsuit. He held a crysknife in his right hand; his feet were bare against the sand-gritted rock. Idaho had warned him time and again: "When in doubt of your surface, bare feet are best." And there were Chani's words of instruction still in the front of his consciousness: "Jamis turns to the right with his knife after a parry. It's a habit in him we've all seen. And he'll aim for the eyes to catch a blink in which to slash you. And he can fight either hand; took out for a knife shift."
    But strongest in Paul so that he felt it with his entire body was training and the instinctual reaction mechanism that had been hammered into him day after day, hour after hour on the practice floor.
    Gurney Halleck's words were there to remember: "The good knife fighter thinks on point and blade and shearing-guard simultaneously. The point can also cut; the blade can also stab; the shearing-guard can also trap your opponent's blade." 
    Paul glanced at the crysknife. There was no shearing-guard; only the slim round ring of the handle with its raised lips to protect the hand. And even so, he realized that he did not know the breaking tension of this blade, did not even know if it could be broken.
    Jamis began sidling to the right along the edge of the ring opposite Paul.
    Paul crouched, realizing then that he had no shield, but was trained to fighting with its subtle field around him, trained to react on defense with utmost speed while his attack would be timed to the controlled slowness necessary for penetrating the enemy's shield. In spite of constant warning from his trainers not to depend on the shield's mindless blunting of attack speed, he knew that shield-awareness was part of him.
    Jamis called out in ritual challenge: "May thy knife chip and shatter!" 
    This knife will break then, Paul thought.
    He cautioned himself that Jamis also was without shield, but the man wasn't trained to its use, had no shield-fighter inhibitions.
    Paul stared across the ring at Jamis. The man's body looked like knotted whipcord on a dried skeleton. His crysknife shone milky yellow in the light of the glowglobes.
    Fear coursed through Paul. He felt suddenly alone and naked standing in dull yellow light within this ring of people. Prescience had fed his knowledge with countless experiences, hinted at the strongest currents of the future and the strings of decision that guided them, but this was the real-now. This was death hanging on an infinite number of miniscule mischances.
    Anything could tip the future here, he realized. Someone coughing in the troop of watchers, a distraction. A variation in a glowglobe's brilliance, a deceptive shadow. 
    I'm afraid, Paul told himself.
    And he circled warily opposite Jamis, repeating silently to himself the Bene Gesserit litany against fear. "Fear is the mind-killer . . . " It was a cool bath washing over him. He felt muscles untie themselves, become poised and ready.
    "I'll sheath my knife in your blood," Jamis snarled. And in the middle of the last word he pounced. 
    Jessica saw the motion, stifled an outcry.
    Where the man struck there was only empty air and Paul stood now behind Jamis with a clear shot at the exposed back. 
    Now, Paul! Now! Jessica screamed it in her mind.
    Paul's motion was slowly timed, beautifully fluid, but so slow it gave Jamis the margin to twist away, backing and turning to the right.
    Paul withdrew, crouching low. "First, you must find my blood," he said.
    Jessica recognized the shield-fighter timing in her son, and it came over her what a two-edged thing that was. The boy's reactions were those of youth and trained to a peak these people had never seen. But the attack was trained, too, and conditioned by the necessities of penetrating a shield barrier. A shield would repel too fast a blow, admit only the slowly deceptive counter. It needed control and trickery to get through a shield. 
    Does Paul see it? she asked herself. He must!
    Again Jamis attacked, ink-dark eyes glaring, his body a yellow blur under the glowglobes.
    And again Paul slipped away to return too slowly on the attack. 
    And again. 
    And again.
    Each time, Paul's counterblow came an instant late.
    And Jessica saw a thing she hoped Jamis did not see. Paul's defensive reactions were blindingly fast, but they moved each time at the precisely correct angle they would take if a shield were helping deflect part of Jamis' blow.
    "Is your son playing with that poor fool?" Stilgar asked. He waved her to silence before she could respond. "Sorry; you must remain silent."
    Now the two figures on the rock floor circled each other; Jamis with knife hand held far forward and tipped up slightly; Paul crouched with knife held low.
    Again, Jamis pounced, and this time he twisted to the right where Paul had been dodging.
    Instead of faking back and out, Paul met the man's knife hand on the point of his own blade. Then the boy was gone, twisting away to the left and thankful for Chani's warning.
    Jamis backed into the center of the circle, rubbing his knife hand. Blood dripped from the injury for a moment, stopped. His eyes were wide and staring--two blue-black holes--studying Paul with a new wariness in the dull light of the glowglobes. 
    "Ah, that one hurt," Stilgar murmured.
    Paul crouched at the ready and, as he had been trained to do after first blood, called out: "Do you yield?" 
    "Hah!" Jamis cried.
    An angry murmur arose from the troop.
    "Hold!" Stilgar called out. "The lad doesn't know our rule." Then, to Paul: "There can be no yielding in the tahaddi-challenge. Death is the test of it."
    Jessica saw Paul swallow hard. And she thought: He's never killed a man like this . . . in the hot blood of a knife fight. Can he do it?
    Paul circled slowly right, forced by Jamis' movement. The prescient knowledge of the time-boiling variables in this cave came back to plague him now. His new understanding told him there were too many swiftly compressed decisions in this fight for any clear channel ahead to show itself.
    Variable piled on variable--that was why this cave lay as a blurred nexus in his path. It was like a gigantic rock in the flood, creating maelstroms in the current around it.
    "Have an end to it, lad," Stilgar muttered. "Don't play with him." 
    Paul crept farther into the ring, relying on his own edge in speed.
    Jamis backed now that the realization swept over him--that this was no soft offworlder in the tahaddi ring, easy prey for a Fremen crysknife.
    Jessica saw the shadow of desperation in the man's face. Now is when he's most dangerous, she thought. Now he's desperate and can do anything. He sees that this is not like a child of his own people, but a fighting machine born and trained to it from infancy. Now the fear I planted in him has come to bloom.
    And she found in herself a sense of pity for Jamis--an emotion tempered by awareness of the immediate peril to her son.
    Jamis could do anything . . . any unpredictable thing, she told herself. She wondered then if Paul had glimpsed this future, if he were reliving this experience. But she saw the way her son moved, the beads of perspiration on his face and shoulders, the careful wariness visible in the flow of muscles. And for the first time she sensed, without understanding it, the uncertainty factor in Paul's gift.
    Paul pressed the fight now, circling but not attacking. He had seen the fear in his opponent. Memory of Duncan Idaho's voice flowed through Paul's awareness: "When your opponent fears you, then's the moment when you give the fear its own rein, give it the time to work on him. Let it become terror. The terrified man fights himself. Eventually, he attacks in desperation. That is the most dangerous moment, but the terrified man can be trusted usually to make a fatal mistake. You are being trained here to detect these mistakes and use them. " 
    The crowd in the cavern began to mutter.
    They think Paul's toying with Jamis, Jessica thought. They think Paul's being needlessly cruel.
    But she sensed also the undercurrent of crowd excitement, their enjoyment of the spectacle. And she could see the pressure building up in Jamis. The moment when it became too much for him to contain was as apparent to her as it was to Jamis . . . or to Paul.
    Jamis leaped high, feinting and striking down with his right hand, but the hand was empty. The crysknife had been shifted to his left hand.
    Jessica gasped.
    But Paul had been warned by Chani: "Jamis fights with either hand." And the depth of his training had taken in that trick en passant. "Keep the mind on the knife and not on the hand that holds it, " Gurney Halleck had told him time and again. "The knife is more dangerous than the hand and the knife can be in either hand." 
    And Paul had seen Jamis' mistake: bad footwork so that it took the man a heartbeat longer to recover from his leap, which had been intended to confuse Paul and hide the knife shift.
    Except for the low yellow light of the glowglobes and the inky eyes of the staring troop, it was similar to a session on the practice floor. Shields didn't count where the body's own movement could be used against it. Paul shifted his own knife in a blurred motion, slipped sideways and thrust upward where Jamis' chest was descending--then away to watch the man crumble.
    Jamis fell like a limp rag, face down, gasped once and turned his face toward Paul, then lay still on the rock floor. His dead eyes stared out like beads of dark glass.
    "Killing with the point lacks artistry," Idaho had once told Paul, "but don't let that hold your hand when the opening presents itself."
    The troop rushed forward, filling the ring, pushing Paul aside. They hid Jamis in a frenzy of huddling activity. Presently a group of them hurried back into the depths of the cavern carrying a burden wrapped in a robe.
    And there was no body on the rock floor.
    Jessica pressed through toward her son. She felt that she swam in a sea of robed and stinking backs, a throng strangely silent.
    Now is the terrible moment, she thought. He has killed a man in clear superiority of mind and muscle. He must not grow to enjoy such a victory.
    She forced herself through the last of the troop and into a small open space where two bearded Fremen were helping Paul into his stillsuit.
    Jessica stared at her son. Paul's eyes were bright. He breathed heavily, permitting the ministrations to his body rather than helping them.
    "Him against Jamis and not a mark on him," one of the men muttered.
    Chani stood at one side, her eyes focused on Paul. Jessica saw the girl's excitement, the admiration in the elfin face. 
    It must be done now and swiftly, Jessica thought.
    She compressed ultimate scorn into her voice and manner, said: "Well-l-l, now--how does it feel to be a killer?" 
    Paul stiffened as though he had been struck. He met his mother's cold glare and his face darkened with a rush of blood. Involuntarily he glanced toward the place on the cavern floor where Jamis had lain.
    Stilgar pressed through to Jessica's side, returning from the cave depths where the body of Jamis had been taken. He spoke to Paul in a bitter, controlled tone: "When the time comes for you to call me out and try for my burda, do not think you will play with me the way you played with Jamis."
    Jessica sensed the way her own words and Stilgar's sank into Paul, doing their harsh work on the boy. The mistake these people made--it served a purpose now. She searched the faces around them as Paul was doing, seeing what he saw. Admiration, yes, and fear . . . and in some--loathing. She looked at Stilgar, saw his fatalism, knew how the fight had seemed to him. 
    Paul looked at his mother. "You know what it was," he said.
    She heard the return to sanity, the remorse in his voice. Jessica swept her glance across the troop, said: "Paul has never before killed a man with a naked blade." 
    Stilgar faced her, disbelief in his face.
    "I wasn't playing with him," Paul said. He pressed in front of his mother, straightening his robe, glanced at the dark place of Jamis' blood on the cavern floor. "I did not want to kill him." 
    Jessica saw belief come slowly to Stilgar, saw the relief in him as he tugged at his beard with a deeply veined hand. She heard muttering awareness spread through the troop.
    "That's why y' asked him to yield," Stilgar said. "I see. Our ways are different, but you'll see the sense in them. I thought we'd admitted a scorpion into our midst." He hesitated, then: "And I shall not call you lad the more." 
    A voice from the troop called out: "Needs a naming, Stil." 
    Stilgar nodded, tugging at his beard. "I see strength in you . . . like the strength beneath a pillar." Again he paused, then: "You shall be known among us as Usul, the base of the pillar. This is your secret name, your troop name. We of Sietch Tabr may use it, but none other may so presume . . . Usul."
    Murmuring went through the troop: "Good choice, that . . . strong . . . bring us luck." And Jessica sensed the acceptance, knowing she was included in it with her champion. She was indeed Sayyadina. 
    "Now, what name of manhood do you choose for us to call you openly?" Stilgar asked.
    Paul glanced at his mother, back to Stilgar. Bits and pieces of this moment registered on his prescient memory, but he felt the differences as though they were physical, a pressure forcing him through the narrow door of the present.
    "How do you call among you the little mouse, the mouse that jumps?" Paul asked, remembering the pop-hop of motion at Tuono Basin. He illustrated with one hand. 
    A chuckle sounded through the troop.
    "We call that one Muad'Dib," Stilgar said.
    Jessica gasped. It was the name Paul had told her, saying that the Fremen would accept them and call him thus. She felt a sudden fear of her son and for him.
    Paul swallowed. He felt that he played a part already played over countless times in his mind . . . yet . . . there were differences. He could see himself perched on a dizzying summit, having experienced much and possessed of a profound store of knowledge, but all around him was abyss.
    And again he remembered the vision of fanatic legions following the green and black banner of the Atreides, pillaging and burning across the universe in the name of their prophet Muad'Dib. 
    That must not happen, he told himself.
    "Is that the name you wish, Muad'Dib?" Stilgar asked.
    "I am an Atreides," Paul whispered, and then louder: "It's not right that I give up entirely the name my father gave me. Could I be known among you as Paul-Muad'Dib?" 
    "You are Paul-Muad'Dib," Stilgar said.
    And Paul thought: That was in no vision of mine. I did a different thing.
    But he felt that the abyss remained all around him.
    Again a murmuring response went through the troop as man turned to man: "Wisdom with strength . . . Couldn't ask more . . . It's the legend for sure . . . Lisan al-Gaib . . . Lisan al-Gaib . . . " 
    "I will tell you a thing about your new name," Stilgar said. "The choice pleases us. Muad'Dib is wise in the ways of the desert. Muad'Dib creates his own water. Muad'Dib hides from the sun and travels in the cool night. Muad'Dib is fruitful and multiplies over the land. Muad'Dib we call 'instructor-of-boys.' That is a powerful base on which to build your life, Paul-Muad'Dib, who is Usul among us. We welcome you."
    Stilgar touched Paul's forehead with one palm, withdrew his hand, embraced Paul and murmured, "Usul."
    As Stilgar released him, another member of the troop embraced Paul, repeating his new troop name. And Paul was passed from embrace to embrace through the troop, hearing the voices, the shadings of tone; "Usul . . . Usul . . . Usul." Already, he could place some of them by name. And there was Chani who pressed her cheek against his as she held him and said his name.
    Presently Paul stood again before Stilgar, who said: "Now, you are of the Ichwan Bedwine, our brother." His face hardened, and he spoke with command in his voice. "And now, Paul-Muad'Dib, tighten up that stillsuit." He glanced at Chani. "Chani! Paul-Muad'Dib's nose plugs are as poor a fit I've ever seen! I thought I ordered you to see after him! "
    "I hadn't the makings, Stil," she said. "There's Jamis' of course, but--" 
    "Enough of that!"
    "Then I'll share one of mine," she said. "I can make do with one until--"
    "You will not," Stilgar said. "I know there are spares among us. Where are the spares? Are we a troop together or a band of savages?"
    Hands reached out from the troop offering hard, fibrous objects. Stilgar selected four, handed them to Chani. "Fit these to Usul and the Sayyadina."
    A voice lifted from the back of the troop: "What of the water, Stil? What of the literjons in their pack?"
    "I know your need, Farok," Stilgar said. He glanced at Jessica. She nodded.
    "Broach one for those that need it," Stilgar said. "Watermaster . . . where is a watermaster? Ah, Shimoom, care for the measuring of what is needed. The necessity and no more. This water is the dower property of the Sayyadina and will be repaid in the sietch at field rates less pack fees." 
    "What is the repayment at field rates?" Jessica asked. 
    "Ten for one," Stilgar said. 
    "But--" 
    "It's a wise rule as you'll come to see," Stilgar said.
    A rustling of robes marked movement at the back of the troop as men turned to get the water.
    Stilgar held up a hand, and there was silence. "As to Jamis," he said, "I order the full ceremony. Jamis was our companion and brother of the Ichwan Bedwine. There shall be no turning away without the respect due one who proved our fortune by his tahaddi-challenge. I invoke the rite . . . at sunset when the dark shall cover him."
    Paul, hearing these words, realized that he had plunged once more into the abyss . . . blind time. There was no past occupying the future in his mind . . . except . . . except . . . he could still sense the green and black Atreides banner waving . . . somewhere ahead . . . still see the jihad's bloody swords and fanatic legions.
    It will not be, he told himself. I cannot let it be.

= = = = = =

God created Arrakis to train the faithful.
-from "The Wisdom of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    In the stillness of the cavern, Jessica heard the scrape of sand on rock as people moved, the distant bird calls that Stilgar had said were the signals of his watchmen.
    The great plastic hood-seals had been removed from the cave's opening. She could see the march of evening shadows across the lip of rock in front of her and the open basin beyond. She sensed the daylight leaving them, sensed it in the dry heat as well as the shadows. She knew her trained awareness soon would give her what these Fremen obviously had--the ability to sense even the slightest change in the air's moisture.
    How they had scurried to tighten their stillsuits when the cave was opened!
    Deep within the cave, someone began chanting:

"Ima trava okolo!
I korenja okolo!"

    Jessica translated silently: These are ashes! And these are roots! " 
    The funeral ceremony for Jamis was beginning.
    She looked out at the Arrakeen sunset, at the banked decks of color in the sky. Night was beginning to utter its shadows along the distant rocks and the dunes. 
    Yet the heat persisted.
    Heat forced her thoughts onto water and the observed fact that this whole people could be trained to be thirsty only at given times. 
    Thirst.
    She could remember moonlit waves on Caladan throwing white robes over rocks . . . and the wind heavy with dampness. Now the breeze that fingered her robes seared the patches of exposed skin at cheeks and forehead. The new nose plugs irritated her, and she found herself overly conscious of the tube that trailed down across her face into the suit, recovering her breath's moisture. 
    The suit itself was a sweatbox.
    "Your suit will be more comfortable when you've adjusted to a lower wafer content in your body, " Stilgar had said.
    She knew he was right, but the knowledge made this moment no more comfortable. The unconscious preoccupation with water here weighed on her mind. No, she corrected herself: it was preoccupation with moisture.
    And that was a more subtle and profound matter.
    She heard approaching footsteps, turned to see Paul come out of the cave's depths trailed by the elfin-faced Chani.
    There's another thing, Jessica thought. Paul must be cautioned about their women. One of these desert women would not do as wife to a Duke. As concubine, yes, but not as wife.
    Then she wondered at herself, thinking: Have I been infected with his schemes? And she saw how well she had been conditioned. I can think of the marital needs of royalty without once weighing my own concubinage. Yet . . . I was more than concubine. 
    "Mother." 
    Paul stopped in front of her. Chani stood at his elbow. 
    "Mother, do you know what they're doing back there?" 
    Jessica looked at the dark patch of his eyes staring out from the hood. "I think so."
    "Chani showed me . . . because I'm supposed to see it and give my . . . permission for the weighing of the water." 
    Jessica looked at Chani.
    "They're recovering Jamis' water," Chani said, and her thin voice came out nasal past the nose plugs. "It's the rule. The flesh belongs to the person, but his water belongs to the tribe . . . except in the combat." 
    "They say the water's mine," Paul said.
    Jessica wondered why this should make her suddenly alert and cautious.
    "Combat water belongs to the winner," Chani said. "It's because you have to fight in the open without stillsuits. The winner has to get his water back that he loses while fighting."
    "I don't want his water," Paul muttered. He felt that he was a part of many images moving simultaneously in a fragmenting way that was disconcerting to the inner eye. He could not be certain what he would do, but of one thing he was positive: he did not want the water distilled out of Jamis' flesh. 
    "It's . . . water," Chani said.
    Jessica marveled at the way she said it. "Water." So much meaning in a simple sound. A Bene Gesserit axiom came to Jessica's mind: "Survival is the ability to swim in strange water." And Jessica thought: Paul and I, we must find the currents and patterns in these strange waters . . . if we're to survive. 
    "You will accept the water," Jessica said.
    She recognized the tone in her voice. She had used that same tone once with Leto, telling her lost Duke that he would accept a large sum offered for his support in a questionable venture--because money maintained power for the Atreides. 
    On Arrakis, water was money. She saw that clearly.
    Paul remained silent, knowing then that he would do as she ordered--not because she ordered it, but because her tone of voice had forced him to re-evaluate. To refuse the water would be to break with accepted Fremen practice.
    Presently Paul recalled the words of 467 Kalima in Yueh's O.C. Bible. He said: "From water does all life begin." 
    Jessica stared at him. Where did he learn that quotation? she asked herself. He hasn't studied the mysteries.
    "Thus it is spoken," Chani said. "Giudichar mantene: It is written in the Shah-Nama that water was the first of all things created."
    For no reason she could explain (and this bothered her more than the sensation), Jessica suddenly shuddered. She turned away to hide her confusion and was just in time to see the sunset. A violent calamity of color spilled over the sky as the sun dipped beneath the horizon.
    "It is time!"
    The voice was Stilgar's ringing in the cavern. "Jamis' weapon has been killed. Jamis has been called by Him, by Shai-hulud, who has ordained the phases for the moons that daily wane and--in the end--appear as bent and withered twigs." Stilgar's voice lowered. "Thus it is with Jamis."
    Silence fell like a blanket on the cavern.
    Jessica saw the gray-shadow movement of Stilgar like a ghost figure within the dark inner reaches. She glanced back at the basin, sensing the coolness.
    "The friends of Jamis will approach," Stilgar said.
    Men moved behind Jessica, dropping a curtain across the opening. A single glowglobe was lighted overhead far back in the cave. Its yellow glow picked out an inflowing of human figures. Jessica heard the rustling of the robes.
    Chani took a step away as though pulled by the light.
    Jessica bent close to Paul's ear, speaking in the family code: "Follow their lead; do as they do. It will be a simple ceremony to placate the shade of Jamis."
    It will be more than that, Paul thought. And he felt a wrenching sensation within his awareness as though he were trying to grasp some thing in motion and render it motionless.
    Chani glided back to Jessica's side, took her hand. "Come, Sayyadina. We must sit apart."
    Paul watched them move off into the shadows, leaving him alone. He felt abandoned.
    The men who had fixed the curtain came up beside him. 
    "Come, Usul."
    He allowed himself to be guided forward, to be pushed into a circle of people being formed around Stilgar, who stood beneath the glowglobe and beside a bundled, curving, and angular shape gathered beneath a robe on the rock floor.
    The troop crouched down at a gesture from Stilgar, their robes hissing with the movement. Paul settled with them, watching Stilgar, noting the way the overhead globe made pits of his eyes and brightened the touch of green fabric at his neck. Paul shifted his attention to the robe-covered mound at Stilgar's feet, recognized the handle of a baliset protruding from the fabric.
    "The spirit leaves the body's water when the first moon rises," Stilgar intoned. "Thus it is spoken. When we see the first moon rise this night, whom will it summon?" 
    "Jamis," the troop responded.
    Stilgar turned full circle on one heel, passing his gaze across the ring of faces. "I was a friend of Jamis," he said. "When the hawk plane stooped upon us at Hole-in-the-Rock, it was Jamis pulled me to safety."
    He bent over the pile beside him, lifted away the robe. "I take this robe as a friend of Jamis--leader's right." He draped the robe over a shoulder, straightening.
    Now, Paul saw the contents of the mound exposed: the pale glistening gray of a stillsuit, a battered literjon, a kerchief with a small book in its center, the bladeless handle of a crysknife, an empty sheath, a folded pack, a paracompass, a distrans, a thumper, a pile of fist-sized metallic hooks, an assortment of what looked like small rocks within a fold of cloth, a clump of bundled feathers . . . and the baliset exposed beside the folded pack.
    So Jamis played the baliset, Paul thought. The instrument reminded him of Gurney Halleck and all that was lost. Paul knew with his memory of the future in the past that some chance-lines could produce a meeting with Halleck, but the reunions were few and shadowed. They puzzled him. The uncertainty factor touched him with wonder. Does it mean that something I will do . . . that I may do, could destroy Gurney . . . or bring him back to life . . . or . . . 
    Paul swallowed, shook his head. 
    Again, Stilgar bent over the mound.
    "For Jamis' woman and for the guards," he said. The small rocks and the book were taken into the folds of his robe. 
    "Leader's right," the troop intoned.
    "The marker for Jamis' coffee service," Stilgar said, and he lifted a flat disc of green metal. "That it shall be given to Usul in suitable ceremony when we return to the sietch." 
    "Leader's right," the troop intoned.
    Lastly, he took the crysknife handle and stood with it. 
    "For the funeral plain," he said.
    "For the funeral plain," the troop responded.
    At her place in the circle across from Paul, Jessica nodded, recognizing the ancient source of the rite, and she thought: The meeting between ignorance and knowledge, between brutality and culture--it begins in the dignity with which we treat our dead. She looked across at Paul, wondering: Will he see it? Will he know what to do?
    "We are friends of Jamis," Stilgar said. "We are not wailing for our dead like a pack of garvarg."
    A gray-bearded man to Paul's left stood up. "I was a friend of Jamis," he said. He crossed to the mound, lifted the distrans. "When our water went below minim at the siege at Two Birds, Jamis shared." The man returned to his place in the circle.
    Am I supposed to say I was a friend of Jamis? Paul wondered. Do they expect me to take something from that pile? He saw faces turn toward him, turn away. They do expect it!
    Another man across from Paul arose, went to the pack and removed the paracompass. "I was a friend of Jamis," he said. "When the patrol caught us at Bight-of-the-Cliff and I was wounded, Jamis drew them off so the wounded could be saved." He returned to his place in the circle.
    Again, the faces turned toward Paul, and he saw the expectancy in them, lowered his eyes. An elbow nudged him and a voice hissed: "Would you bring the destruction on us?" 
    How can I say I was his friend? Paul wondered.
    Another figure arose from the circle opposite Paul and, as the hooded face came into the light, he recognized his mother. She removed a kerchief from the mount. "I was a friend of Jamis," she said. "When the spirit of spirits within him saw the needs of truth, that spirit withdrew and spared my son." She returned to her place.
    And Paul recalled the scorn in his mother's voice as she had confronted him after the fight. "How does it f eel to be a killer?" 
    Again, he saw the faces turned toward him, felt the anger and fear in the troop. A passage his mother had once filmbooked for him on "The Cult of the Dead" flickered through Paul's mind. He knew what he had to do.
    Slowly, Paul got to his feet. 
    A sigh passed around the circle.
    Paul felt the diminishment of his self as he advanced into the center of the circle. It was as though he lost a fragment of himself and sought it here. He bent over the mound of belongings, lifted out the baliset. A string twanged softly as it struck against something in the pile.
    "I was a friend of Jamis," Paul whispered.
    He felt tears burning his eyes, forced more volume into his voice. "Jamis taught me . . . that . . . when you kill . . . you pay for it. I wish I'd known Jamis better."
    Blindly, he groped his way back to his place in the circle, sank to the rock floor.
    A voice hissed: "He sheds tears!"
    It was taken up around the ring: "Usul gives moisture to the dead!" 
    He felt fingers touch his damp cheek, heard the awed whispers.
    Jessica, hearing the voices, felt the depth of the experience, realized what terrible inhibitions there must be against shedding tears. She focused on the words: "He gives moisture to the dead." It was a gift to the shadow world--tears. They would be sacred beyond a doubt.
    Nothing on this planet had so forcefully hammered into her the ultimate value of water. Not the water-sellers, not the dried skins of the natives, not stillsuits or the rules of water discipline. Here there was a substance more precious than all others--it was life itself and entwined all around with symbolism and ritual.
    Water.
    "I touched his cheek," someone whispered. "I felt the gift." 
    At first, the fingers touching his face frightened Paul. He clutched the cold handle of the baliset, feeling the strings bite his palm. Then he saw the faces beyond the groping hands--the eyes wide and wondering.
    Presently, the hands withdrew. The funeral ceremony resumed. But now there was a subtle space around Paul, a drawing back as the troop honored him by a respectful isolation. The ceremony ended with a low chant:

"Full moon calls thee-- 
Shai-hulud shall thou see; 
Red the night, dusky sky, 
Bloody death didst thou die. 
We pray to a moon: she is round-- 
Luck with us will then abound, 
What we seek for shall be found 
In the land of solid ground."

    A bulging sack remained at Stilgar's feet. He crouched, placed his palms against it. Someone came up beside him, crouched at his elbow, and Paul recognized Chani's face in the hood shadow.
    "Jamis carried thirty-three liters and seven and three-thirty-seconds drachms of the tribe's water," Chani said. "I bless it now in the presence of a Sayyadina. Ekkeri-akairi, this is the water, fillissin-follasy of Paul-Muad'Dib! Kivi a-kavi, never the more, nakalas! Nakelas! to be measured and counted, ukair-an! by the heartbeats jan-jan-jan of our friend . . . Jamis."
    In an abrupt and profound silence, Chani turned, stared at Paul. Presently she said: "Where I am flame be thou the coals. Where I am dew be thou the water." 
    "Bi-lal kaifa," intoned the troop.
    "To Paul-Muad'Dib goes this portion," Chani said. "May he guard it for the tribe, preserving it against careless loss. May he be generous with it in time of need. May he pass it on in his time for the good of the tribe." 
    "Bi-lal kaifa," intoned the troop.
    I must accept that water, Paul thought. Slowly, he arose, made his way to Chani's side. Stilgar stepped back to make room for him, took the baliset gently from his hand. 
    "Kneel," Chani said. 
    Paul knelt.
    She guided his hands to the waterbag, held them against the resilient surface. "With this water the tribe entrusts thee," she said. "Jamis is gone from it. Take it in peace." She stood, pulling Paul up with her.
    Stilgar returned the baliset, extended a small pile of metal rings in one palm. Paul looked at them, seeing the different sizes, the way the light of the glowglobe reflected off them.
    Chani took the largest ring, held it on a finger. "Thirty liters," she said. One by one, she took the others, showing each to Paul, counting them. "Two liters; one liter; seven watercounters of one drachm each; one watercounter of three-thirty-seconds drachms. In all--thirty-three liters and seven and three-thirty-seconds drachms." 
    She held them up on her finger for Paul to see. 
    "Do you accept them?" Stilgar asked. 
    Paul swallowed, nodded. "Yes."
    "Later," Chani said, "I will show you how to tie them in a kerchief so they won't rattle and give you away when you need silence." She extended her hand.
    "Will you . . . hold them for me?" Paul asked. 
    Chani turned a startled glance on Stilgar.
    He smiled, said, "Paul-Muad'Dib who is Usul does not yet know our ways, Chani. Hold his watercounters without commitment until it's time to show him the manner of carrying them." 
    She nodded, whipped a ribbon of cloth from beneath her robe, linked the rings onto it with an intricate over and under weaving, hesitated, then stuffed them into the sash beneath her robe.
    I missed something there, Paul thought. He sensed the feeling of humor around him, something bantering in it, and his mind linked up a prescient memory: watercounters offered to a woman--courtship ritual.
    "Watermasters," Stilgar said.
    The troop arose in a hissing of robes. Two men stepped out, lifted the waterbag. Stilgar took down the glowglobe, led the way with it into the depths of the cave.
    Paul was pressed in behind Chani, noted the buttery glow of light over rock walls, the way the shadows danced, and he felt the troop's lift of spirits contained in a hushed air of expectancy.
    Jessica, pulled into the end of the troop by eager hands, hemmed around by jostling bodies, suppressed a moment of panic. She had recognized fragments of the ritual, identified the shards of Chakobsa and Bhotani-jib in the words, and she knew the wild violence that could explode out of these seemingly simple moments.
    Jan-jan-jan, she thought. Go-go-go.
    It was like a child's game that had lost all inhibition in adult hands.
    Stilgar stopped at a yellow rock wall. He pressed an outcropping and the wall swung silently away from him, opening along an irregular crack. He led the way through past a dark honeycomb lattice that directed a cool wash of air across Paul when he passed it.
    Paul turned a questioning stare on Chani, tugged her arm. "That air felt damp," he said. 
    "Sh-h-h-h," she whispered.
    But a man behind them said: "Plenty of moisture in the trap tonight. Jamis' way of telling us he's satisfied."
    Jessica passed through the secret door, heard it close behind. She saw how the Fremen slowed while passing the honeycomb lattice, felt the dampness of the air as she came opposite it.
    Windtrap! she thought. They've a concealed windtrap somewhere on the surface to funnel air down here into cooler regions and precipitate the moisture from it.
    They passed through another rock door with latticework above it, and the door closed behind them. The draft of air at their backs carried a sensation of moisture clearly perceptible to both Jessica and Paul.
    At the head of the troop, the glowglobe in Stilgar's hands dropped below the level of the heads in front of Paul. Presently he felt steps beneath his feet, curving down to the left. Light reflected back up across hooded heads and a winding movement of people spiraling down the steps.
    Jessica sensed mounting tension in the people around her, a pressure of silence that rasped her nerves with its urgency.
    The steps ended and the troop passed through another low door. The light of the glowglobe was swallowed in a great open space with a high curved ceiling.
    Paul felt Chani's hand on his arm, heard a faint dripping sound in the chill air, felt an utter stillness come over the Fremen in the cathedral presence of water.
    I have seen this place in a dream, he thought.
    The thought was both reassuring and frustrating. Somewhere ahead of him on this path, the fanatic hordes cut their gory path across the universe in his name. The green and black Atreides banner would become a symbol of terror. Wild legions would charge into battle screaming their war cry: "Muad'Dib!" 
    It must not be, he thought. I cannot let it happen. 
    But he could feel the demanding race consciousness within him, his own terrible purpose, and he knew that no small thing could deflect the juggernaut. It was gathering weight and momentum. If he died this instant, the thing would go on through his mother and his unborn sister. Nothing less than the deaths of all the troop gathered here and now--himself and his mother included--could stop the thing.
    Paul stared around him, saw the troop spread out in a line. They pressed him forward against a low barrier carved from native rock. Beyond the barrier in the glow of Stilgar's globe, Paul saw an unruffled dark surface of water. It stretched away into shadows--deep and black--the far wall only faintly visible, perhaps a hundred meters away.
    Jessica felt the dry pulling of skin on her cheeks and forehead relaxing in the presence of moisture. The water pool was deep; she could sense its deepness, and resisted a desire to dip her hands into it.
    A splashing sounded on her left. She looked down the shadowy line of Fremen, saw Stilgar with Paul standing beside him and the watermasters emptying their load into the pool through a flowmeter. The meter was a round gray eye above the pool's rim. She saw its glowing pointer move as the water flowed through it, saw the pointer stop at thirty-three liters, seven and three-thirty-seconds drachms.
    Superb accuracy in water measurement, Jessica thought. And she noted that the walls of the meter trough held no trace of moisture after the water's passage. The water flowed off those walls without binding tension. She saw a profound clue to Fremen technology in the simple fact: they were perfectionists.
    Jessica worked her way down the barrier to Stilgar's side. Way was made for her with casual courtesy. She noted the withdrawn look in Paul's eyes, but the mystery of this great pool of water dominated her thoughts.
    Stilgar looked at her. "There were those among us in need of water," he said, "yet they would come here and not touch this water. Do you know that?" 
    "I believe it," she said.
    He looked at the pool. "We have more than thirty-eight million decaliters here," he said. "Walled off from the little makers, hidden and preserved." 
    "A treasure trove," she said.
    Stilgar lifted the globe to look into her eyes. "It is greater than treasure. We have thousands of such caches. Only a few of us know them all." He cocked his head to one side. The globe cast a yellow-shadowed glow across face and beard. "Hear that?" 
    They listened.
    The dripping of water precipitated from the windtrap filled the room with its presence. Jessica saw that the entire troop was caught up in a rapture of listening. Only Paul seemed to stand remote from it.
    To Paul, the sound was like moments ticking away. He could feel time flowing through him, the instants never to be recaptured. He sensed a need for decision, but felt powerless to move.
    "It has been calculated with precision," Stilgar whispered. "We know to within a million decaliters how much we need. When we have it, we shall change the face of Arrakis."
    A hushed whisper of response lifted from the troop: "Bi-lal kaifa."
    "We will trap the dunes beneath grass plantings," Stilgar said, his voice growing stronger. "We will tie the water into the soil with trees and undergrowth." 
    "Bi-lal kaifa," intoned the troop.
    "Each year the polar ice retreats," Stilgar said.
    "Bi-lal kaifa," they chanted.
    "We shall make a homeworld of Arrakis--with melting lenses at the poles, with lakes in the temperate zones, and only the deep desert for the maker and his spice." 
    "Bi-lal kaifa."
    "And no man ever again shall want for water. It shall be his for dipping from well or pond or lake or canal. It shall run down through the qanats to feed our plants. It shall be there for any man to take. It shall be his for holding out his hand." 
    "Bi-lal kaifa."
    Jessica felt the religious ritual in the words, noted her own instinctively awed response. They're in league with the future, she thought. They have their mountain to climb. This is the scientist's dream . . . and these simple people, these peasants, are filled with it.
    Her thoughts turned to Liet-Kynes, the Emperor's planetary ecologist, the man who had gone native--and she wondered at him. This was a dream to capture men's souls, and she could sense the hand of the ecologist in it. This was a dream for which men would die willingly. It was another of the essential ingredients that she felt her son needed; people with a goal. Such people would be easy to imbue with fervor and fanaticism. They could be wielded like a sword to win back Paul's place for him.
    "We leave now," Stilgar said, "and wait for the first moon's rising. When Jamis is safely on his way, we will go home." 
    Whispering their reluctance, the troop fell in behind him, turned back along the water barrier and up the stairs.
    And Paul, walking behind Chani, felt that a vital moment had passed him, that he had missed an essential decision and was now caught up in his own myth. He knew he had seen this place before, experienced it in a fragment of prescient dream on faraway Caladan, but details of the place were being filled in now that he had not seen. He felt a new sense of wonder at the limits of his gift. It was as though he rode within the wave of time, sometimes in its trough, sometimes on a crest--and all around him the other waves lifted and fell, revealing and then hiding what they bore on their surface.
    Through it all, the wild jihad still loomed ahead of him, the violence and the slaughter. It was like a promontory above the surf.
    The troop filed through the last door into the main cavern. The door was sealed. Lights were extinguished, hoods removed from the cavern openings, revealing the night and the stars that had come over the desert.
    Jessica moved to the dry lip of the cavern's edge, looked up at the stars. They were sharp and near. She felt the stirring of the troop around her, heard the sound of a baliset being tuned somewhere behind her, and Paul's voice humming the pitch. There was a melancholy in his tone that she did not like.
    Chani's voice intruded from the deep cave darkness: "Tell me about the waters of your birthworld, Paul Muad'Dib." 
    And Paul: "Another time, Chani. I promise." 
    Such sadness.
    "It's a good baliset," Chani said.
    "Very good," Paul said. "Do you think Jamis'll mind my using it?"
    He speaks of the dead in the present tense, Jessica thought. The implications disturbed her.
    A man's voice intruded: "He liked music betimes, Jamis did." 
    "Then sing me one of your songs," Chani pleaded.
    Such feminine allure in that girl-child's voice, Jessica thought. I must caution Paul about their women . . . and soon.
    "This was a song of a friend of mine," Paul said. "I expect he's dead now, Gurney is. He called it his evensong." 
    The troop grew still, listening as Paul's voice lifted in a sweet boy tenor with the baliset tinkling and strumming beneath it:

"This clear time of seeing embers--
A gold-bright sun's lost in first dusk. 
What frenzied senses, desp'rate musk 
Are consort of rememb'ring."

    Jessica felt the verbal music in her breast--pagan and charged with sounds that made her suddenly and intensely aware of herself, feeling her own body and its needs. She listened with a tense stillness.

"Night's pearl-censered requi-em . . . 
"Tis for us!
What joys run, then--
Bright in your eyes--
What flower-spangled amores 
Pull at our hearts . . .
What flower-spangled amores 
Fill our desires."

    And Jessica heard the after-stillness that hummed in the air with the last note. Why does my son sing a love song to that girl-child? she asked herself. She felt an abrupt fear. She could sense life flowing around her and she had no grasp on its reins. Why did he choose that song? she wondered. The instincts are true sometimes. Why did he do this?
    Paul sat silently in the darkness, a single stark thought dominating his awareness: My mother is my enemy. She does not know it, but she is. She is bringing the jihad. She bore me; she trained me. She is my enemy.

= = = = = =

The concept of progress acts as a protective mechanism to shield us from the terrors of the future.
-from "Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    On his seventeenth birthday, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen killed his one hundredth slave-gladiator in the family games. Visiting observers from the Imperial Court--a Count and Lady Fenring--were on the Harkonnen homeworld of Giedi Prime for the event, invited to sit that afternoon with the immediate family in the golden box above the triangular arena.
    In honor of the na-Baron's nativity and to remind all Harkonnens and subjects that Feyd-Rautha was heir-designate, it was holiday on Giedi Prime. The old Baron had decreed a meridian-to-meridian rest from labors, and effort had been spent in the family city of Harko to create the illusion of gaiety: banners flew from buildings, new paint had been splashed on the walls along Court Way.
    But off the main way, Count Fenring and his lady noted the rubbish heaps, the scabrous brown walls reflected in the dark puddles of the streets, and the furtive scurrying of the people.
    In the Baron's blue-walled keep, there was fearful perfection, but the Count and his lady saw the price being paid--guards everywhere and weapons with that special sheen that told a trained eye they were in regular use. There were checkpoints for routine passage from area to area even within the keep. The servants revealed their military training in the way they walked, in the set of their shoulders . . . in the way their eyes watched and watched and watched.
    "The pressure's on," the Count hummed to his lady in their secret language. "The Baron is just beginning to see the price he really paid to rid himself of the Duke Leto."
    "Sometime I must recount for you the legend of the phoenix," she said.
    They were in the reception hall of the keep waiting to go to the family games. It was not a large hall--perhaps forty meters long and half that in width--but false pillars along the sides had been shaped with an abrupt taper, and the ceiling had a subtle arch, all giving the illusion of much greater space. 
    "Ah-h-h, here comes the Baron," the Count said.
    The Baron moved down the length of the hall with that peculiar waddling-glide imparted by the necessities of guiding suspensor-hung weight. His jowls bobbed up and down; the suspensors jiggled and shifted beneath his orange robe. Rings glittered on his hands and opafires shone where they had been woven into the robe.
    At the Baron's elbow walked Feyd-Rautha. His dark hair was dressed in close ringlets that seemed incongruously gay above sullen eyes. He wore a tight-fitting black tunic and snug trousers with a suggestion of bell at the bottom. Soft-soled slippers covered his small feet.
    Lady Fenring, noting the young man's poise and the sure flow of muscles beneath the tunic thought: Here's one who won't let himself go to fat.
    The Baron stopped in front of them, took Feyd-Rautha's arm in a possessive grip, said, "My nephew, the na-Baron, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen." And, turning his baby-fat face toward Feyd-Rautha, he said, "The Count and Lady Fenring of whom I've spoken." 
    Feyd-Rautha dipped his head with the required courtesy. He stared at the Lady Fenring. She was golden-haired and willowy, her perfection of figure clothed in a flowing gown of ecru--simple fitness of form without ornament. Gray-green eyes stared back at him. She had that Bene Gesserit serene repose about her that the young man found subtly disturbing.
    "Um-m-m-m-ah-hm-m-m-m," said the Count. He studied Feyd-Rautha. "The, hm-m-m-m, precise young man, ah, my . . . hm-m-m-m . . . dear?" The Count glanced at the Baron. "My dear Baron, you say you've spoken of us to this precise young man? What did you say?"
    "I told my nephew of the great esteem our Emperor holds for you. Count Fenring," the Baron said. And he thought: Mark him well, Feyd! A killer with the manners of a rabbit--this is the most dangerous kind.
    "Of course!" said the Count, and he smiled at his lady.
    Feyd-Rautha found the man's actions and words almost insulting. They stopped just short of something overt that would require notice. The young man focused his attention on the Count: a small man, weak-looking. The face was weaselish with overlarge dark eyes. There was gray at the temples. And his movements--he moved a hand or turned his head one way, then he spoke another way. It was difficult to follow.
    "Um-m-m-m-m-ah-h-h-hm-m-m, you come upon such, mm-m-m, preciseness so rarely," the Count said, addressing the Baron's shoulder. "I . . . ah, congratulate you on the hm-m-m perfection of your ah-h-h heir. In the light of the hm-m-m elder, one might say."
    "You are too kind," the Baron said. He bowed, but Feyd-Rautha noted that his uncle's eyes did not agree with the courtesy.
    "When you're mm-m-m ironic, that ah-h-h suggests you're hm-m-m-m thinking deep thoughts," the Count said.
    There he goes again, Feyd-Rautha thought. It sounds like he's being insulting, but there's nothing you can call out for satisfaction.
    Listening to the man gave Feyd-Rautha the feeling his head was being pushed through mush . . . um-m-m-ah-h-h-hm-m-m-m! Feyd-Rautha turned his attention back to the Lady Fenring. 
    "We're ah-h-h taking up too much of this young man's time," she said. "I understand he's to appear in the arena today." 
    By the houris of the Imperial hareem, she's a lovely one! Feyd-Rautha thought. He said: "I shall make a kill for you this day, my Lady. I shall make the dedication in the arena, with your permission."
    She returned his stare serenely, but her voice carried whiplash as she said: "You do not have my permission."
    "Feyd!" the Baron said. And he thought: That imp! Does he want this deadly Count to call him out?
    But the Count only smiled and said: "Hm-m-m-m-um-m-m." 
    "You really must be getting ready for the arena, Feyd," the Baron said. "You must be rested and not take any foolish risks." 
    Feyd-Rautha bowed, his face dark with resentment. "I'm sure everything will be as you wish, Uncle." He nodded to Count Fenring. "Sir." To the lady: "My Lady." And he turned, strode out of the hall, barely glancing at the knot of Families Minor near the double doors.
    "He's so young," the Baron sighed.
    "Um-m-m-m-ah indeed hmmm," the Count said.
    And the Lady Fenring thought: Can that be the young man the Reverend Mother meant? Is that a bloodline we must preserve?
    "We've more than an hour before going to the arena," the Baron sad. "Perhaps we could have our little talk now, Count Fenring." He tipped his gross head to the right. "There's a considerable amount of progress to be discussed."
    And the Baron thought; Let us see now how the Emperors errand boy gets across whatever message he carries without ever being so crass as to speak it right out.
    The Count spoke to his lady: "Um-m-m-m-ah-h-h-hm-m-m, you mm-m will ah-h-h excuse us, my dear?"
    "Each day, some time each hour, brings change," she said. "Mm-m-m-m." And she smiled sweetly at the Baron before turning away. Her long skirts swished and she walked with a straight-backed regal stride toward the double doors at the end of the hall.
    The Baron noted how all conversation among the Houses Minor there stopped at her approach, how the eyes followed her. Bene Gesserit! the Baron thought. The universe would be better rid of them all!
    "There's a cone of silence between two of the pillars over here on our left," the Baron said. "We can talk there without fear of being overheard." He led the way with his waddling gait into the sound-deadening field, feeling the noises of the keep become dull and distant.
    The Count moved up beside the Baron, and they turned, facing the wall so their lips could not be read.
    "We're not satisfied with the way you ordered the Sardaukar off Arrakis," the Count said.
    Straight talk! the Baron thought.
    "The Sardaukar could not stay longer without risking that others would find out how the Emperor helped me," the Baron said.
    "But your nephew Rabban does not appear to be pressing strongly enough toward a solution of the Fremen problem." 
    "What does the Emperor wish?" the Baron asked. "There cannot be more than a handful of Fremen left on Arrakis. The southern desert is uninhabitable. The northern desert is swept regularly by our patrols." 
    "Who says the southern desert is uninhabitable?" 
    "Your own planetologist said it, my dear Count." 
    "But Doctor Kynes is dead." 
    "Ah, yes . . . unfortunate, that."
    "We've word from an overflight across the southern reaches," the Count said. "There's evidence of plant life." 
    "Has the Guild then agreed to a watch from space?" 
    "You know better than that, Baron. The Emperor cannot legally post a watch on Arrakis."
    "And I cannot afford it," the Baron said. "Who made this overflight?"
    "A . . . smuggler."
    "Someone has lied to you, Count," the Baron said. "Smugglers cannot navigate, the southern reaches any better than can Rabban's men. Storms, sand-static, and all that, you know. Navigation markers are knocked out faster than they can be installed." 
    "We'll discuss various types of static another time," the Count said.
    Ah-h-h-h, the Baron thought. "Have you found some mistake in my accounting then?" he demanded.
    "When you imagine mistakes there can be no self-defense," the Count said.
    He's deliberately trying to arouse my anger, the Baron thought. He took two deep breaths to calm himself. He could smell his own sweat, and the harness of the suspensors beneath his robe felt suddenly itchy and galling.
    "The Emperor cannot be unhappy about the death of the concubine and the boy," the Baron said. "They fled into the desert. There was a storm."
    "Yes, there were so many convenient accidents," the Count agreed
    "I do not like your tone, Count," the Baron said.
    "Anger is one thing, violence another," the Count said. "Let me caution you: Should an unfortunate accident occur to me here the Great Houses all would learn what you did on Arrakis. They've long suspected how you do business."
    "The only recent business I can recall," the Baron said, "was transportation of several legions of Sardaukar to Arrakis." 
    "You think you could hold that over the Emperor's head?" 
    "I wouldn't think of it!"
    The Count smiled. "Sardaukar commanders could be found who'd confess they acted without orders because they wanted a battle with your Fremen scum."
    "Many might doubt such a confession," the Baron said, but the threat staggered him. Are Sardaukar truly that disciplined? he wondered.
    "The Emperor does wish to audit your books," the Count said. 
    "Any time." 
    "You . . . ah . . . have no objections?"
    "None. My CHOAM Company directorship will bear the closest scrutiny." And he thought: Let him bring a false accusation against me and have it exposed. I shall stand there, Promethean, saying: "Behold me, I am wronged. " Then let him bring any other accusation against me, even a true one. The Great Houses will not believe a second attack from an accuser once proved wrong.
    "No doubt your books will bear the closest scrutiny," the Count muttered.
    "Why is the Emperor so interested in exterminating the Fremen?" the Baron asked.
    "You wish the subject to be changed, eh?" The Count shrugged. "It is the Sardaukar who wish it, not the Emperor. They needed practice in killing . . . and they hate to see a task left undone." 
    Does he think to frighten me by reminding me that he is supported by bloodthirsty killers? the Baron wondered.
    "A certain amount of killing has always been an arm of business," the Baron said, "but a line has to be drawn somewhere. Someone must be left to work the spice."
    The Count emitted a short, barking laugh. "You think you can harness the Fremen?"
    "There never were enough of them for that," the Baron said. "But the killing has made the rest of my population uneasy. It's reaching the point where I'm considering another solution to the Arrakeen problem, my dear Fenring. And I must confess the Emperor deserves credit for the inspiration."
    "Ah-h-h?"
    "You see, Count, I have the Emperor's prison planet, Salusa Secundus, to inspire me."
    The Count stared at him with glittering intensity. "What possible connection is there between Arrakis and Salusa Secundus?" 
    The Baron felt the alertness in Fenring's eyes, said: "No connection yet." 
    "Yet?"
    "You must admit it'd be a way to develop a substantial work force on Arrakis--use the place as a prison planet." 
    "You anticipate an increase in prisoners?"
    "There has been unrest," the Baron admitted. "I've had to squeeze rather severely, Fenring. After all, you know the price I paid that damnable Guild to transport our mutual force to Arrakis. That money has to come from somewhere."
    "I suggest you not use Arrakis as a prison planet without the Emperor's permission, Baron."
    "Of course not," the Baron said, and he wondered at the sudden chill in Fenring's voice.
    "Another matter," the Count said. "We learn that Duke Leto's Mentat, Thufir Hawat, is not dead but in your employ." 
    "I could not bring myself to waste him," the Baron said.
    "You lied to our Sardaukar commander when you said Hawat was dead."
    "Only a white lie, my dear Count. I hadn't the stomach for a long argument with the man." 
    "Was Hawat the real traitor?"
    "Oh, goodness, no! It was the false doctor." The Baron wiped at perspiration on his neck. "You must understand, Fenring, I was without a Mentat. You know that. I've never been without a Mentat. It was most unsettling." 
    "How could you get Hawat to shift allegiance?"
    "His Duke was dead." The Baron forced a smile. "There's nothing to fear from Hawat, my dear Count. The Mentat's flesh has been impregnated with a latent poison. We administer an antidote in his meals. Without the antidote, the poison is triggered--he'd die in a few days." 
    "Withdraw the antidote," the Count said. 
    "But he's useful!" 
    "And he knows too many things no living man should know." 
    "You said the Emperor doesn't fear exposure." 
    "Don't play games with me, Baron!" 
    "When I see such an order above the Imperial seal I'll obey it," the Baron said. "But I'll not submit to your whim." 
    "You think it whim?"
    "What else can it be? The Emperor has obligations to me, too, Fenring. I rid him of the troublesome Duke." 
    "With the help of a few Sardaukar."
    "Where else would the Emperor have found a House to provide the disguising uniforms to hide his hand in this matter?" 
    "He has asked himself the same question, Baron, but with a slightly different emphasis."
    The Baron studied Fenring, noting the stiffness of jaw muscles, the careful control. "Ah-h-h, now," the Baron said. "I hope the Emperor doesn't believe he can move against me in total secrecy." 
    "He hopes it won't become necessary."
    "The Emperor cannot believe I threaten him!" The Baron permitted anger and grief to edge his voice, thinking: Let him wrong me in that! I could place myself on the throne while still beating my breast over how I'd been wronged.
    The Count's voice went dry and remote as he said: "The Emperor believes what his senses tell him."
    "Dare the Emperor charge me with treason before a full Landsraad Council?" And the Baron held his breath with the hope of it. 
    "The Emperor need dare nothing."
    The Baron whirled away in his suspensors to hide his expression. It could happen in my lifetime! he thought. Emperor! Let him wrong me! Then--the bribes and coercion, the rallying of the Great Houses: they'd flock to my banner like peasants running for shelter. The thing they fear above all else is the Emperor's Sardaukar loosed upon them one House at a time.
    "It's the Emperor's sincere hope he'll never have to charge you with treason," the Count said.
    The Baron found it difficult to keep irony out of his voice and permit only the expression of hurt, but he managed. "I've been a most loyal subject. These words hurt me beyond my capacity to express." 
    "Um-m-m-m-ah-hm-m-m," said the Count.
    The Baron kept his back to the Count, nodding. Presently he said, "It's time to go to the arena." 
    "Indeed," said the Count.
    They moved out of the cone of silence and, side by side, walked toward the clumps of Houses Minor at the end of the hall. A bell began a slow tolling somewhere in the keep--twenty-minute warning for the arena gathering.
    "The Houses Minor wait for you to lead them," the Count said, nodding toward the people they approached.
    Double meaning . . . double meaning, the Baron thought.
    He looked up at the new talismans flanking the exit to his hall--the mounted bull's head and the oil painting of the Old Duke Atreides, the late Duke Leto's father. They filled the Baron with an odd sense of foreboding, and he wondered what thoughts these talismans had inspired in the Duke Leto as they hung in the halls of Caladan and then on Arrakis--the bravura father and the head of the bull that had killed him.
    "Mankind has ah only one mm-m-m science," the Count said as they picked up their parade of followers and emerged from the hall into the waiting room--a narrow space with high windows and floor of patterned white and purple tile.
    "And what science is that?" the Baron asked.
    "It's the um-m-m-ah-h science of ah-h-h discontent," the Count said.
    The Houses Minor behind them, sheep-faced and responsive, laughed with just the right tone of appreciation, but the sound carried a note of discord as it collided with the sudden blast of motors that came to them when pages threw open the outer doors, revealing the line of ground cars, their guidon pennants whipping in a breeze.
    The Baron raised his voice to surmount the sudden noise, said, "I hope you'll not be discontented with the performance of my nephew today, Count Fenring."
    "I ah-h-h am filled um-m-m only with a hm-m-m sense of anticipation, yes," the Count said. "Always in the ah-h-h process verbal, one um-m-m ah-h-h must consider the ah-h-h office of origin."
    The Baron hid his sudden stiffening of surprise by stumbling on the first step down from the exit. Process verbal! That was a report of a crime against the Imperium!
    But the Count chuckled to make it seem a joke, and patted the Baron's arm.
    All the way to the arena, though, the Baron sat back among the armored cushions of his car, casting covert glances at the Count beside him, wondering why the Emperor's errand boy had thought it necessary to make that particular kind of joke in front of the Houses Minor. It was obvious that Fenring seldom did anything he felt to be unnecessary, or used two words where one would do, or held himself to a single meaning in a single phrase.
    They were seated in the golden box above the triangular arena--horns blaring, the tiers above and around them jammed with a hubbub of people and waving pennants--when the answer came to the Baron.
    "My dear Baron," the Count said, leaning close to his ear, "you know, don't you, that the Emperor has not given official sanction to your choice of heir?"
    The Baron felt himself to be within a sudden personal cone of silence produced by his own shock. He stared at Fenring, barely seeing the Count's lady come through the guards beyond to join the party in the golden box.
    "That's really why I'm here today," the Count said. "The Emperor wishes me to report on whether you've chosen a worthy successor. There's nothing like the arena to expose the true person from beneath the mask, eh?"
    "The Emperor promised me free choice of heir!" the Baron grated.
    "We shall see," Fenring said, and turned away to greet his lady. She sat down, smiling at the Baron, then giving her attention to the sand floor beneath them where Feyd-Rautha was emerging in giles and tights--the black glove and the long knife in his right hand, the white glove and the short knife in his left hand.
    "White for poison, black for purity," the Lady Fenring said. "A curious custom, isn't it, my love?" 
    "Um-m-m-m," the Count said.
    The greeting cheer lifted from the family galleries, and Feyd-Rautha paused to accept it, looking up and scanning the faces--seeing his cousines and cousins, the demibrothers, the concubines and out-freyn relations. They were so many pink trumpet mouths yammering amidst a flutter of colorful clothing and banners.
    It came to Feyd-Rautha then that the packed ranks of faces would look just as avidly at his blood as at that of the slave-gladiator. There was not a doubt of the outcome in this fight, of course. Here was only the form of danger without its substance--yet . . . 
    Feyd-Rautha held up his knives to the sun, saluted the three corners of the arena in the ancient manner. The short knife in white-gloved hand (white, the sign of poison) went first into its sheath. Then the long blade in the black-gloved hand--the pure blade that now was unpure, his secret weapon to turn this day into a purely personal victory: poison on the black blade.
    The adjustment of his body shield took only a moment, and he paused to sense the skin-tightening at his forehead assuring him he was properly guarded.
    This moment carried its own suspense, and Feyd-Rautha dragged it out with the sure hand of a showman, nodding to his handlers and distracters, checking their equipment with a measuring stare--gyves in place with their prickles sharp and glistening, the barbs and hooks waving with their blue streamers. 
    Feyd-Rautha signaled the musicians.
    The slow march began, sonorous with its ancient pomp, and Feyd-Rautha led his troupe across the arena for obeisance at the foot of his uncle's box. He caught the ceremonial key as it was thrown. 
    The music stopped.
    Into the abrupt silence, he stepped back two paces, raised the key and shouted. "I dedicate this truth to . . . " And he paused, knowing his uncle would think: The young fool's going to dedicate to Lady Fenring after all and cause a ruckus!
    " . . . to my uncle and patron, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen!" Feyd-Rautha shouted.
    And he was delighted to see his uncle sigh.
    The music resumed at the quick-march, and Feyd-Rautha led his men scampering back across the arena to the prudence door that admitted only those wearing the proper identification band. Feyd-Rautha prided himself that he never used the pru-door and seldom needed distracters. But it was good to know they were available this day--special plans sometimes involved special dangers. 
    Again, silence settled over the arena.
    Feyd-Rautha turned, faced the big red door across from him through which the gladiator would emerge. 
    The special gladiator.
    The plan Thufir Hawat had devised was admirably simple and direct, Feyd-Rautha thought. The slave would not be drugged--that was the danger. Instead, a key word had been drummed into the man's unconscious to immobilize his muscles at a critical instant. Feyd-Rautha rolled the vital word in his mind, mouthing it without sound: "Scum!" To the audience, it would appear that an un-drugged slave had been slipped into the arena to kill the na-Baron. And all the carefully arranged evidence would point to the slavemaster.
    A low humming arose from the red door's servomotors as they were armed for opening.
    Feyd-Rautha focused all his awareness on the door. This first moment was the critical one. The appearance of the gladiator as he emerged told the trained eye much it needed to know. All gladiators were supposed to be hyped on elacca drug to come out kill-ready in fighting stance--but you had to watch how they hefted the knife, which way they turned in defense, whether they were actually aware of the audience in the stands. The way a slave cocked his head could give the most vital clue to counter and feint. 
    The red door slammed open.
    Out charged a tall, muscular man with shaved head and darkly pitted eyes. His skin was carrot-colored as it should be from the elacca drug, but Feyd-Rautha knew the color was paint. The slave wore green leotards and the red belt of a semishield--the belt's arrow pointing left to indicate the slave's left side was shielded. He held his knife sword-fashion, cocked slightly outward in the stance of a trained fighter. Slowly, he advanced into the arena, turning his shielded side toward Feyd-Rautha and the group at the pru-door.
    "I like not the look of this one, "said one of Feyd-Rautha's barb-men. "Are you sure he's drugged, m'Lord?" 
    "He has the color," Feyd-Rautha said. 
    "Yet he stands like a fighter," said another helper.
    Feyd-Rautha advanced two steps onto the sand, studied this slave.
    "What has he done to his arm?" asked one of the distracters.
    Feyd-Rautha's attention went to a bloody scratch on the man's left forearm, followed the arm down to the hand as it pointed to a design drawn in blood on the left hip of the green leotards--a wet shape there: the formalized outline of a hawk. 
    Hawk!
    Feyd-Rautha looked up into the darkly pitted eyes, saw them glaring at him with uncommon alertness.
    It's one of Duke Leto's fighting men we took on Arrakis! Feyd-Rautha thought. No simple gladiator this! A chill ran through him, and he wondered if Hawat had another plan for this arena--a feint within a feint within a feint. And only the slavemaster prepared to take the blame!
    Feyd-Rautha's chief handler spoke at his ear: "I like not the look on that one, m'Lord. Let me set a barb or two in his knife arm to try him."
    "I'll set my own barbs," Feyd-Rautha said. He took a pair of the long, hooked shafts from the handler, hefted them, testing the balance. These barbs, too, were supposed to be drugged--but not this time, and the chief handler might die because of that. But it was all part of the plan.
    "You'll come out of this a hero," Hawat had said. "Killed your gladiator man to man and in spite of treachery. The slavemaster will be executed and your man will step into his spot." 
    Feyd-Rautha advanced another five paces into the arena, playing out the moment, studying the slave. Already, he knew, the experts in the stands above him were aware that something was wrong. The gladiator had the correct skin color for a drugged man, but he stood his ground and did not tremble. The aficionados would be whispering among themselves now: "See how he stands. He should be agitated--attacking or retreating. See how he conserves his strength, how he waits. He should not wait."
    Feyd-Rautha felt his own excitement kindle. Let there be treachery in Hawat's mind, he thought. I can handle this slave. And it's my long knife that carries the poison this time, not the short one. Even Hawat doesn't know that.
    "Hai, Harkonnen!" the slave called. "Are you prepared to die?"
    Deathly stillness gripped the arena. Slaves did not issue the challenge!
    Now, Feyd-Rautha had a clear view of the gladiator's eyes, saw the cold ferocity of despair in them. He marked the way the man stood, loose and ready, muscles prepared for victory. The slave grapevine had carried Hawat's message to this one: "You'll get a true chance to kill the na-Baron." That much of the scheme was as they'd planned it, then.
    A tight smile crossed Feyd-Rautha's mouth. He lifted the barbs, seeing success for his plans in the way the gladiator stood. 
    "Hai! Hai!" the slave challenged, and crept forward two steps. 
    No one in the galleries can mistake it now, Feyd-Rautha thought.
    This slave should have been partly crippled by drug-induced terror. Every movement should have betrayed his inner knowledge that there was no hope for him--he could not win. He should have been filled with the stories of the poisons the na-Baron chose for the blade in his white-gloved hand. The na-Baron never gave quick death; he delighted in demonstrating rare poisons, could stand in the arena pointing out interesting side effects on a writhing victim. There was fear in the slave, yes--but not terror.
    Feyd-Rautha lifted the barbs high, nodded in an almost-greeting. 
    The gladiator pounced.
    His feint and defensive counter were as good as any Feyd-Rautha had ever seen. A timed side blow missed by the barest fraction from severing the tendons of the na-Baron's left leg.
    Feyd-Rautha danced away, leaving a barbed shaft in the slave's right forearm, the hooks completely buried in flesh where the man could not withdraw them without ripping tendons. 
    A concerted gasp lifted from the galleries. 
    The sound filled Feyd-Rautha with elation.
    He knew now what his uncle was experiencing, sitting up there with the Fenrings, the observers from the Imperial Court, beside him. There could be no interference with this fight. The forms must be observed in front of witnesses. And the Baron would interpret the events in the arena only one way--threat to himself.
    The slave backed, holding knife in teeth and lashing the barbed shaft to his arm with the pennant. "I do not feel your needle!" he shouted. Again he crept forward, knife ready, left side presented, his body bent backward to give it the greatest surface of protection from the half-shield.
    That action, too, didn't escape the galleries. Sharp cries came from the family boxes. Feyd-Rautha's handlers were calling out to ask if he needed them.
    He waved them back to the pru-door.
    I'll give them a show such as they've never had before, Feyd-Rautha thought. No tame killing where they can sit back and admire the style. This'll be something to take them by the guts and twist them. When I'm Baron they'll remember this day and won't be a one of them can escape fear of me because of this day.
    Feyd-Rautha gave ground slowly before the gladiator's crablike advance. Arena sand grated underfoot. He heard the slave's panting, smelled his own sweat and a faint odor of blood on the air.
    Steadily, the na-Baron moved backward, turning to the right, his second barb ready. The slave danced sideways. Feyd-Rautha appeared to stumble, heard the scream from the galleries. 
    Again, the slave pounced.
    Gods, what a fighting man! Feyd-Rautha thought as he leaped aside. Only youth's quickness saved him, but he left the second barb buried in the deltoid muscle of the slave's right arm. 
    Shrill cheers rained from the galleries.
    They cheer me now, Feyd-Rautha thought. He heard the wildness in the voices just as Hawat had said he would. They'd never cheered a family fighter that way before. And he thought with an edge of grimness on a thing Hawat had told him: "It's easier to be terrified by an enemy you admire."
    Swiftly, Feyd-Rautha retreated to the center of the arena where all could see clearly. He drew his long blade, crouched and waited for the advancing slave.
    The man took only the time to lash the second barb tight to his arm, then sped in pursuit.
    Let the family see me do this thing, Feyd-Rautha thought. I am their enemy: let them think of me as they see me now. 
    He drew his short blade.
    "I do not fear you, Harkonnen swine," the gladiator said. "Your tortures cannot hurt a dead man. I can be dead on my own blade before a handler lays finger to my flesh. And I'll have you dead beside me!"
    Feyd-Rautha grinned, offered now the long blade, the one with the poison. "Try this one," he said, and feinted with the short blade in his other hand.
    The slave shifted knife hands, turned inside both parry and feint to grapple the na-Baron's short blade--the one in the white gloved hand that tradition said should carry the poison. 
    "You will die, Harkonnen," the gladiator gasped.
    They struggled sideways across the sand. Where Feyd-Rautha's shield met the slave's halfshield, a blue glow marked the contact. The air around them filled with ozone from the field. 
    "Die on your own poison!" the slave grated.
    He began forcing the white-gloved hand inward, turning the blade he thought carried the poison.
    Let them see this! Feyd-Rautha thought. He brought down the long blade, felt it clang uselessly against the barbed shaft lashed to the slave's arm.
    Feyd-Rautha felt a moment of desperation. He had not thought the barbed shafts would be an advantage for the slave. But they gave the man another shield. And the strength of this gladiator! The short blade was being forced inward inexorably, and Feyd-Rautha focused on the fact that a man could also die on an unpoisoned blade.
    "Scum!" Feyd-Rautha gasped.
    At the key word, the gladiator's muscles obeyed with a momentary slackness. It was enough for Feyd-Rautha. He opened a space between them sufficient for the long blade. Its poisoned tip flicked out, drew a red line down the slave's chest. There was instant agony in the poison. The man disengaged himself, staggered backward.
    Now, let my dear family watch, Feyd-Rautha thought. Let them think on this slave who tried to turn the knife he thought poisoned and use it against me. Let them wonder how a gladiator could come into this arena ready for such an attempt. And let them always be aware they cannot know for sure which of my hands carries the poison.
    Feyd-Rautha stood in silence, watching the slowed motions of the slave. The man moved within a hesitation-awareness. There was an orthographic thing on his face now for every watcher to recognize. The death was written there. The slave knew it had been done to him and he knew how it had been done. The wrong blade had carried the poison.
    "You!" the man moaned.
    Feyd-Rautha drew back to give death its space. The paralyzing drug in the poison had yet to take full effect, but the man's slowness told of its advance.
    The slave staggered forward as though drawn by a string--one dragging step at a time. Each step was the only step in his universe. He still clutched his knife, but its point wavered.
    "One day . . . one . . . of us . . . will . . . get . . . you," he gasped.
    A sad little moue contorted his mouth. He sat, sagged, then stiffened and rolled away from Feyd-Rautha, face down. 
    Feyd-Rautha advanced in the silent arena, put a toe under the gladiator and rolled him onto his back to give the galleries a clear view of the face when the poison began its twisting, wrenching work on the muscles. But the gladiator came over with his own knife, protruding from his breast.
    In spite of frustration, there was for Feyd-Rautha a measure of admiration for the effort this slave had managed in overcoming the paralysis to do this thing to himself. With the admiration came the realization that here was truly a thing to fear. 
    That which makes a man superhuman is terrifying.
    As he focused on this thought, Feyd-Rautha became conscious of the eruption of noise from the stands and galleries around him. They were cheering with utter abandon. 
    Feyd-Rautha turned, looking up at them.
    All were cheering except the Baron, who sat with hand to chin in deep contemplation--and the Count and his lady, both of whom were staring down at him, their faces masked by smiles.
    Count Fenring turned to his lady, said: "Ah-h-h-um-m-m, a resourceful um-m-m-m young man. Eh, mm-m-m-ah, my dear?" 
    "His ah-h-h synaptic responses are very swift," she said.
    The Baron looked at her, at the Count, returned his attention to the arena, thinking: If someone could get that close to one of mine! Rage began to replace his fear. I'll have the slavemaster dead over a slow fire this night . . . and if this Count and his lady had a hand in it . . . 
   The conversation in the Baron's box was remote movement to Feyd-Rautha, the voices drowned in the foot-stamping chant that came now from all around: 
    "Head! Head! Head! Head!"
    The Baron scowled, seeing the way Feyd-Rautha turned to him. Languidly, controlling his rage with difficulty, the Baron waved his hand toward the young man standing in the arena beside the sprawled body of the slave. Give the boy a head. He earned it by exposing the slavemaster.
    Feyd-Rautha saw the signal of agreement, thought: They think they honor me. Let them see what I think!
    He saw his handlers approaching with a saw-knife to do the honors, waved them back, repeated the gesture as they hesitated. They think they honor me with just a head! he thought. He bent and crossed the gladiator's hands around the protruding knife handle, then removed the knife and placed it in the limp hands.
    It was done in an instant, and he straightened, beckoned his handlers. "Bury this slave intact with his knife in his hands," he said. "The man earned it."
    In the golden box, Count Fenring leaned close to the Baron, said: "A grand gesture, that--true bravura. Your nephew has style as well as courage."
    "He insults the crowd by refusing the head," the Baron muttered.
    "Not at all," Lady Fenring said. She turned, looking up at the tiers around them.
    And the Baron noted the line of her neck--a truly lovely flowing of muscles--like a young boy's.
    "They like what your nephew did," she said.
    As the import of Feyd-Rautha's gesture penetrated to the most distant seats, as the people saw the handlers carrying off the dead gladiator intact, the Baron watched them and realized she had interpreted the reaction correctly. The people were going wild, beating on each other, screaming and stamping.
    The Baron spoke wearily. "I shall have to order a fete. You cannot send people home like this, their energies unspent. They must see that I share their elation." He gave a hand signal to his guard, and a servant above them dipped the Harkonnen orange pennant over the box--once, twice, three times--signal for a fete.
    Feyd-Rautha crossed the arena to stand beneath the golden box, his weapons sheathed, arms hanging at his sides. Above the undiminished frenzy of the crowd, he called: "A fete, Uncle?" 
    The noise began to subside as people saw the conversation and waited.
    "In your honor, Feyd!" the Baron called down. And again, he caused the pennant to be dipped in signal.
    Across the arena, the pru-barriers had been dropped and young men were leaping down into the arena, racing toward Feyd-Rautha.
    "You ordered the pru-shields dropped. Baron?" the Count asked.
    "No one will harm the lad," the Baron said. "He's a hero." 
    The first of the charging mass reached Feyd-Rautha, lifted him on their shoulders, began parading around the arena.
    "He could walk unarmed and unshielded through the poorest quarters of Harko tonight," the Baron said. "They'd give him the last of their food and drink just for his company." 
    The Baron pushed himself from his chair, settled his weight into his suspensors. "You will forgive me, please. There are matters that require my immediate attention. The guard will see you to the keep."
    The Count arose, bowed. "Certainly, Baron. We're looking forward to the fete. I've ah-h-h-mm-m-m never seen a Harkonnen fete."
    "Yes," the Baron said. "The fete." He turned, was enveloped by guards as he stepped into the private exit from the box.
    A guard captain bowed to Count Fenring. "Your orders, my Lord?"
    "We will ah-h-h wait for the worst mm-m-m crush to um-m-m pass," the Count said.
    "Yes, m'Lord." The man bowed himself back three paces.
    Count Fenring faced his lady, spoke again in their personal humming-code tongue: "You saw it, of course?" 
    In the same humming tongue, she said: "The lad knew the gladiator wouldn't be drugged. There was a moment of fear, yes, but no surprise." 
    "It was planned," he said. "The entire performance." 
    "Without a doubt." 
    "It stinks of Hawat." 
    "Indeed," she said.
    "I demanded earlier that the Baron eliminate Hawat." 
    "That was an error, my dear." 
    "I see that now." 
    "The Harkonnens may have a new Baron ere long." 
    "If that's Hawat's plan."
    "That will bear examination, true," she said.
    "The young one will be more amenable to control." 
    "For us . . . after tonight," she said.
    "You don't anticipate difficulty seducing him, my little brood-mother?" 
    "No, my love. You saw how he looked at me." 
    "Yes, and I can see now why we must have that bloodline." 
    "Indeed, and it's obvious we must have a hold on him. I'll plant deep in his deepest self the necessary prana-bindu phrases to bend him."
    "We'll leave as soon as possible--as soon as you're sure," he said.
    She shuddered. "By all means. I should not want to bear a child in this terrible place." 
    "The things we do in the name of humanity," he said. 
    "Yours is the easy part," she said.
    "There are some ancient prejudices I overcome," he said. "They're quite primordial, you know."
    "My poor dear," she said, and patted his cheek. "You know this is the only way to be sure of saving that bloodline." 
    He spoke in a dry voice: "I quite understand what we do." 
    "We won't fail," she said.
    "Guilt starts as a feeling of failure," he reminded.
    "There'll be no guilt," she said. "Hypno-ligation of that Feyd-Rautha's psyche and his child in my womb--then we go." 
    "That uncle," he said. "Have you ever seen such distortion?" 
    "He's pretty fierce," she said, "but the nephew could well grow to be worse."
    "Thanks to that uncle. You know, when you think what this lad could've been with some other upbringing--with the Atreides code to guide him, for example." 
    "It's sad, "she said.
    "Would that we could've saved both the Atreides youth and this one. From what I heard of that young Paul--a most admirable lad, good union of breeding and training." He shook his head. "But we shouldn't waste sorrow over the aristocracy of misfortune." 
    "There's a Bene Gesserit saying," she said. 
    "You have sayings for everything!" he protested.
    "You'll like this one," she said. "It goes: 'Do not count a human dead until you've seen his body. And even then you can make a mistake.' "

= = = = = =

Muad'Dib tells us in "A Time of Reflection" that his first collisions with Arrakeen necessities were the true beginnings of his education. He learned then how to pole the sand for its weather, learned the language of the wind's needles stinging his skin, learned how the nose can buzz with sand-itch and how to gather his body's precious moisture around him to guard it and preserve it. As his eyes assumed the blue of the Ibad, he learned the Chakobsa way.
-Stilgar's preface to "Muad'Dib, the Man" by the Princess Irulan

    Stilgar's troop returning to the sietch with its two strays from the desert climbed out of the basin in the waning light of the first moon. The robed figures hurried with the smell of home in their nostrils. Dawn's gray line behind them was brightest at the notch in their horizon-calendar that marked the middle of autumn, the month of Caprock.
    Wind-raked dead leaves strewed the cliffbase where the sietch children had been gathering them, but the sounds of the troop's passage (except for occasional blunderings by Paul and his mother) could not be distinguished from the natural sounds of the night. 
    Paul wiped sweat-caked dust from his forehead, felt a tug at his arm, heard Chani's voice hissing. "Do as I told you: bring the fold of your hood down over your forehead! Leave only the eyes exposed. You waste moisture."
    A whispered command behind them demanded silence: "The desert hears you!" 
    A bird chirruped from the rocks high above them. 
    The troop stopped, and Paul sensed abrupt tension.
    There came a faint thumping from the rocks, a sound no louder than mice jumping in the sand. 
    Again, the bird chirruped.
    A stir passed through the troop's ranks. And again, the mouse-thumping pecked its way across the sand. 
    Once more, the bird chirruped.
    The troop resumed its climb up into a crack in the rocks, but there was a stillness of breath about the Fremen now that filled Paul with caution, and he noted covert glances toward Chani, the way she seemed to withdraw, pulling in upon herself.
    There was rock underfoot now, a faint gray swishing of robes around them, and Paul sensed a relaxing of discipline, but still that quiet-of-the-person about Chani and the others. He followed a shadow shape--up steps, a turn, more steps, into a tunnel, past two moisture-sealed doors and into a globelighted narrow passage with yellow rock walls and ceiling.
    All around him, Paul saw the Fremen throwing back their hoods, removing nose plugs, breathing deeply. Someone sighed. Paul looked for Chani, found that she had left his side. He was hemmed in by a press of robed bodies. Someone jostled him, said, "Excuse me, Usul. What a crush! It's always this way."
    On his left, the narrow bearded face of the one called Farok turned toward Paul. The stained eyepits and blue darkness of eyes appeared even darker under the yellow globes. "Throw off your hood, Usul," Farok said. "You're home." And he helped Paul, releasing the hood catch, elbowing a space around them.
    Paul slipped out his nose plugs, swung the mouth baffle aside. The odor of the place assailed him: unwashed bodies, distillate esters of reclaimed wastes, everywhere the sour effluvia of humanity with, over it all, a turbulence of spice and spicelike harmonics.
    "Why are we waiting, Farok?" Paul asked.
    "For the Reverend Mother, I think. You heard the message--poor Chani."
    Poor Chani? Paul asked himself. He looked around, wondering where she was, where his mother had got to in all this crush. 
    Farok took a deep breath. "The smells of home," he said.
    Paul saw that the man was enjoying the stink of this air, that there was no irony in his tone. He heard his mother cough then, and her voice came back to him through the press of the troop: "How rich the odors of your sietch, Stilgar. I see you do much working with the spice . . . you make paper . . . plastics . . . and isn't that chemical explosives?"
    "You know this from what you smell?" It was another man's voice.
    And Paul realized she was speaking for his benefit, that she wanted him to make a quick acceptance of this assault on his nostrils.
    There came a buzz of activity at the head of the troop and a prolonged indrawn breath that seemed to pass through the Fremen, and Paul heard hushed voices back down the line: "It's true then--Liet is dead."
    Liet, Paul thought. Then: Chani, daughter of Liet. The pieces fell together in his mind. Liet was the Fremen name of the planetologist.
    Paul looked at Farok, asked: "Is it the Liet known as Kynes?" 
    "There is only one Liet," Farok said.
    Paul turned, stared at the robed back of a Fremen in front of him. Then Liet-Kynes is dead, he thought.
    "It was Harkonnen treachery," someone hissed. "They made it seem an accident . . . lost in the desert . . . a 'thopter crash . . . " 
    Paul felt a burst of anger. The man who had befriended them, helped save them from the Harkonnen hunters, the man who had sent his Fremen cohorts searching for two strays in the desert . . . another victim of the Harkonnens.
    "Does Usul hunger yet for revenge?" Farok asked.
    Before Paul could answer, there came a low call and the troop swept forward into a wider chamber, carrying Paul with them. He found himself in an open space confronted by Stilgar and a strange woman wearing a flowing wraparound garment of brilliant orange and green. Her arms were bare to the shoulders, and he could see she wore no stillsuit. Her skin was a pale olive. Dark hair swept back from her high forehead, throwing emphasis on sharp cheekbones and aquiline nose between the dense darkness of her eyes.
    She turned toward him, and Paul saw golden rings threaded with water tallies dangling from her ears. 
    "This bested my Jamis?" she demanded.
    "Be silent, Harah," Stilgar said. "It was Jamis' doing--he invoked the tahaddi al-burhan."
    "He's not but a boy!" she said. She gave her head a sharp shake from side to side, setting the water tallies to jingling. "My children made fatherless by another child? Surely, 'twas an accident!" 
    "Usul, how many years have you?" Stilgar asked. 
    "Fifteen standard," Paul said.
    Stilgar swept his eyes over the troop. "Is there one among you cares to challenge me?" 
    Silence.
    Stilgar looked at the woman. "Until I've learned his weirding ways. I'd not challenge him." 
    She returned his stare. "But--"
    "You saw the stranger, woman who went with Chani to the Reverend Mother?" Stilgar asked. "She's an out-freyn Sayyadina, mother to this lad. The mother and son are masters of the weirding ways of battle."
    "Lisan al-Gaib," the woman whispered. Her eyes held awe as she turned them back toward Paul.
    The legend again, Paul thought.
    "Perhaps," Stilgar said. "It hasn't been tested, though." He returned his attention to Paul. "Usul, it's our way that you've now the responsibility for Jamis' woman here and for his two sons. His yali . . . his quarters, are yours. His coffee service is yours . . . and this, his woman."
    Paul studied the woman, wondering: Why isn't she mourning her man? Why does she show no hate for me? Abruptly, he saw that the Fremen were staring at him, waiting.
    Someone whispered: "There's work to do. Say how you accept her." 
    Stilgar said: "Do you accept Harah as woman or servant?" 
    Harah lifted her arms, turning slowly on one heel. "I am still young, Usul. It's said I still look as young as when I was with Geoff . . . before Jamis bested him." 
    Jamis killed another to win her, Paul thought.
    Paul said: "If I accept her as servant, may I yet change my mind at a later time?"
    "You'd have a year to change your decision," Stilgar said. "After that, she's a free woman to choose as she wishes . . . or you could free her to choose for herself at any time. But she's your responsibility, no matter what, for one year . . . and you'll always share some responsibility for the sons of Jamis." 
    "I accept her as servant," Paul said.
    Harah stamped a foot, shook her shoulders with anger. "But I'm young!"
    Stilgar looked at Paul, said: "Caution's a worthy trait in a man who'd lead." 
    "But I'm young!" Harah repeated.
    "Be silent," Stilgar commanded. "If a thing has merit, it'll be. Show Usul to his quarters and see he has fresh clothing and a place to rest." 
    "Oh-h-h-h!" she said.
    Paul had registered enough of her to have a first approximation. He felt the impatience of the troop, knew many things were being delayed here. He wondered if he dared ask the whereabouts of his mother and Chani, saw from Stilgar's nervous stance that it would be a mistake.
    He faced Harah, pitched his voice with tone and tremolo to accent her fear and awe, said: "Show me my quarters, Harah! We will discuss your youth another time."
    She backed away two steps, cast a frightened glance at Stilgar. "He has the weirding voice," she husked.
    "Stilgar," Paul said. "Chani's father put heavy obligation on me. If there's anything . . . "
    "It'll be decided in council," Stilgar said. "You can speak then." He nodded in dismissal, turned away with the rest of the troop following him.
    Paul took Harah's arm, noting how cool her flesh seemed, feeling her tremble. "I'll not harm you, Harah," he said. "Show me our quarters." And he smoothed his voice with relaxants.
    "You'll not cast me out when the year's gone?" she said. "I know for true I'm not as young as once I was."
    "As long as I live you'll have a place with me," he said. He released her arm. "Come now, where are our quarters?" 
    She turned, led the way down the passage, turning right into a wide cross tunnel lighted by evenly spaced yellow overhead globes. The stone floor was smooth, swept clean of sand.
    Paul moved up beside her, studied the aquiline profile as they walked. "You do not hate me, Harah?" 
    "Why should I hate you?"
    She nodded to a cluster of children who stared at them from the raised ledge of a side passage. Paul glimpsed adult shapes behind the children partly hidden by filmy hangings. 
    "I . . . bested Jamis."
    "Stilgar said the ceremony was held and you're a friend of Jamis." She glanced sidelong at him. "Stilgar said you gave moisture to the dead. Is that truth?" 
    "Yes." 
    "It's more than I'll do . . . can do." 
    "Don't you mourn him?" 
    "In the time of mourning, I'll mourn him."
    They passed an arched opening. Paul looked through it at men and women working with stand-mounted machinery in a large, bright chamber. There seemed an extra tempo of urgency to them. 
    "What're they doing in there?" Paul asked.
    She glanced back as they passed beyond the arch, said: "They hurry to finish the quota in the plastics shop before we flee. We need many dew collectors for the planting." 
    "Flee?" 
    "Until the butchers stop hunting us or are driven from our land." 
    Paul caught himself in a stumble, sensing an arrested instant of time, remembering a fragment, a visual projection of prescience--but it was displaced, like a montage in motion. The bits of his prescient memory were not quite as he remembered them. 
    "The Sardaukar hunt us," he said.
    "They'll not find much excepting an empty sietch or two," she said. "And they'll find their share of death in the sand." 
    "They'll find this place?" he asked. 
    "Likely." 
    "Yet we take the time to . . . " He motioned with his head toward the arch now far behind them. " . . . make . . . dew collectors?" 
    "The planting goes on." 
    "What're dew collectors?" he asked.
    The glance she turned on him was full of surprise. "Don't they teach you anything in the . . . wherever it is you come from?" 
    "Not about dew collectors."
    "Hai!" she said, and there was a whole conversation in the one word.
    "Well, what are they?"
    "Each bush, each weed you see out there in the erg," she said, "how do you suppose it lives when we leave it? Each is planted most tenderly in its own little pit. The pits are filled with smooth ovals of chromoplastic. Light turns them white. You can see them glistening in the dawn if you look down from a high place. White reflects. But when Old Father Sun departs, the chromoplastic reverts to transparency in the dark. It cools with extreme rapidity. The surface condenses moisture out of the air. That moisture trickles down to keep our plants alive."
    "Dew collectors," he muttered, enchanted by the simple beauty of such a scheme.
    "I'll mourn Jamis in the proper time for it," she said, as though her mind had not left his other question. "He was a good man, Jamis, but quick to anger. A good provider, Jamis, and a wonder with the children. He made no separation between Geoff's boy, my firstborn, and his own true son. They were equal in his eyes." She turned a questing stare on Paul. "Would it be that way with you, Usul?" 
    "We don't have that problem." 
    "But if--" 
    "Harah!" 
    She recoiled at the harsh edge in his voice.
    They passed another brightly lighted room visible through an arch on their left. "What's made there?" he asked.
    "They repair the weaving machinery," she said. "But it must be dismantled by tonight." She gestured at a tunnel branching to their left. "Through there and beyond, that's food processing and stillsuit maintenance." She looked at Paul. "Your suit looks new. But if it needs work, I'm good with suits. I work in the factory in season."
    They began coming on knots of people now and thicker clusterings of openings in the tunnel's sides. A file of men and women passed them carrying packs that gurgled heavily, the smell of spice strong about them.
    "They'll not get our water," Harah said. "Or our spice. You can be sure of that."
    Paul glanced at the openings in the tunnel walls, seeing the heavy carpets on the raised ledge, glimpses of rooms with bright fabrics on the walls, piled cushions. People in the openings fell silent at their approach, followed Paul with untamed stares.
    "The people find it strange you bested Jamis," Harah said. "Likely you'll have some proving to do when we're settled in a new sietch." 
    "I don't like killing," he said.
    "Thus Stilgar tells it," she said, but her voice betrayed her disbelief.
    A shrill chanting grew louder ahead of them. They came to another side opening wider than any of the others Paul had seen. He slowed his pace, staring in at a room crowded with children sitting cross-legged on a maroon-carpeted floor.
    At a chalkboard against the far wall stood a woman in a yellow wraparound, a projecto-stylus in one hand. The board was filled with designs--circles, wedges and curves, snake tracks and squares, flowing arcs split by parallel lines. The woman pointed to the designs one after the other as fast as she could move the stylus, and the children chanted in rhythm with her moving hand.
    Paul listened, hearing the voices grow dimmer behind as he moved deeper into the sietch with Harah.
    "Tree," the children chanted. "Tree, grass, dune, wind, mountain, hill, fire, lightning, rock, rocks, dust, sand, heat, shelter, heat, full, winter, cold, empty, erosion, summer, cavern, day, tension, moon, night, caprock, sandtide, slope, planting, binder . . . " 
    "You conduct classes at a time like this?" Paul asked.
    Her face went somber and grief edged her voice: "What Liet taught us, we cannot pause an instant in that. Liet who is dead must not be forgotten. It's the Chakobsa way."
    She crossed the tunnel to the left, stepped up onto a ledge, parted gauzy orange hangings and stood aside: "Your yali is ready for you, Usul."
    Paul hesitated before joining her on the ledge. He felt a sudden reluctance to be alone with this woman. It came to him that he was surrounded by a way of life that could only be understood by postulating an ecology of ideas and values. He felt that this Fremen world was fishing for him, trying to snare him in its ways. And he knew what lay in that snare--the wild jihad, the religious war he felt he should avoid at any cost.
    "This is your yali," Harah said. "Why do you hesitate?" 
    Paul nodded, joined her on the ledge. He lifted the hangings across from her, feeling metal fibers in the fabric, followed her into a short entrance way and then into a larger room, square, about six meters to a side--thick blue carpets on the floor, blue and green fabrics hiding the rock walls, glowglobes tuned to yellow overhead bobbing against draped yellow ceiling fabrics. 
    The effect was that of an ancient tent.
    Harah stood in front of him, left hand on hip, her eyes studying his face. "The children are with a friend," she said. "They will present themselves later."
    Paul masked his unease beneath a quick scanning of the room. Thin hangings to the right, he saw, partly concealed a larger room with cushions piled around the walls. He felt a soft breeze from an air duct, saw the outlet cunningly hidden in a pattern of hangings directly ahead of him.
    "Do you wish me to help you remove your stillsuit?" Harah asked.
    "No . . . thank you." 
    "Shall I bring food?" 
    "Yes."
    "There is a reclamation chamber off the other room." She gestured. "For your comfort and convenience when you're out of your stillsuit."
    "You said we have to leave this sietch," Paul said. "Shouldn't we be packing or something?"
    "It will be done in its time," she said. "The butchers have yet to penetrate to our region." 
    Still she hesitated, staring at him. 
    "What is it?" he demanded.
    "You've not the eyes of the Ibad," she said. "It's strange but not entirely unattractive." 
    "Get the food," he said. "I'm hungry."
    She smiled at him--a knowing, woman's smile that he found disquieting. "I am your servant," she said, and whirled away in one lithe motion, ducking behind a heavy wall hanging that revealed another passage before falling back into place.
    Feeling angry with himself, Paul brushed through the thin hanging on the right and into the larger room. He stood there a moment caught by uncertainty. And he wondered where Chani was . . . Chani who had just lost her father.
    We're alike in that, he thought.
    A wailing cry sounded from the outer corridors, its volume muffled by the intervening hangings. It was repeated, a bit more distant. And again. Paul realized someone was calling the time. He focused on the fact that he had seen no clocks.
    The faint smell of burning creosote bush came to his nostrils, riding on the omnipresent stink of the sietch. Paul saw that he had already suppressed the odorous assault on his senses.
    And he wondered again about his mother, how the moving montage of the future would incorporate her . . . and the daughter she bore. Mutable time-awareness danced around him. He shook his head sharply, focusing his attention on the evidences that spoke of profound depth and breadth in this Fremen culture that had swallowed them.
    With its subtle oddities.
    He had seen a thing about the caverns and this room, a thing that suggested far greater differences than anything he had yet encountered.
    There was no sign of a poison snooper here, no indication of their use anywhere in the cave warren. Yet he could smell poisons in the sietch stench--strong ones, common ones.
    He heard a rustle of hangings, thought it was Harah returning with food, and turned to watch her. Instead, from beneath a displaced pattern of hangings, he saw two young boys--perhaps aged nine and ten--staring out at him with greedy eyes. Each wore a small kindjal-type of crysknife, rested a hand on the hilt.
    And Paul recalled the stories of the Fremen--that their children fought as ferociously as the adults.

= = = = = =

The hands move, the lips move --
Ideas gush from his words, 
And his eyes devour!
He is an island of Selfdom.
-description from "A Manual of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Phosphortubes in the faraway upper reaches of the cavern cast a dim light onto the thronged interior, hinting at the great size of this rock-enclosed space . . . larger, Jessica saw, than even the Gathering Hall of her Bene Gesserit school. She estimated there were more than five thousand people gathered out there beneath the ledge where she stood with Stilgar. 
    And more were coming.
    The air was murmurous with people.
    "Your son has been summoned from his rest, Sayyadina," Stilgar said. "Do you wish him to share in your decision?" 
    "Could he change my decision?"
    "Certainly, the air with which you speak comes from your own lungs, but--" 
    "The decision stands," she said.
    But she felt misgivings, wondering if she should use Paul as an excuse for backing out of a dangerous course. There was an unborn daughter to think of as well. What endangered the flesh of the mother endangered the flesh of the daughter.
    Men came with rolled carpets, grunting under the weight of them, stirring up dust as the loads were dropped onto the ledge.
    Stilgar took her arm, led her back into the acoustical horn that formed the rear limits of the ledge. He indicated a rock bench within the horn. "The Reverend Mother will sit here, but you may rest yourself until she comes." 
    "I prefer to stand," Jessica said.
    She watched the men unroll the carpets, covering the ledge, looked out at the crowd. There were at least ten thousand people on the rock floor now. 
    And still they came.
    Out on the desert, she knew, it already was red nightfall, but here in the cavern hall was perpetual twilight, a gray vastness thronged with people come to see her risk her life.
    A way was opened through the crowd to her right, and she saw Paul approaching flanked by two small boys. There was a swaggering air of self-importance about the children. They kept hands on knives, scowled at the wall of people on either side.
    "The sons of Jamis who are now the sons of Usul," Stilgar said. "They take their escort duties seriously." He ventured a smile at Jessica.
    Jessica recognized the effort to lighten her mood and was grateful for it, but could not take her mind from the danger that confronted her.
    I had no choice but to do this, she thought. We must move swiftly if we're to secure our place among these Fremen.
    Paul climbed to the ledge, leaving the children below. He stopped in front of his mother, glanced at Stilgar, back to Jessica. "What is happening? I thought I was being summoned to council." 
    Stilgar raised a hand for silence, gestured to his left where another way had been opened in the throng. Chani came down the lane opened there, her elfin face set in lines of grief. She had removed her stillsuit and wore a graceful blue wraparound that exposed her thin arms. Near the shoulder on her left arm, a green kerchief had been tied.
    Green for mourning, Paul thought.
    It was one of the customs the two sons of Jamis had explained to him by indirection, telling him they wore no green because they accepted him as guardian-father.
    "Are you the Lisan al-Gaib?" they had asked. And Paul had sensed the jihad in their words, shrugged off the question with one of his own--learning then that Kaleff, the elder of the two, was ten, and the natural son of Geoff. Orlop, the younger, was eight, the natural son of Jamis.
    It had been a strange day with these two standing guard over him because he asked it, keeping away the curious, allowing him the time to nurse his thoughts and prescient memories, to plan a way to prevent the jihad.
    Now, standing beside his mother on the cavern ledge and looking out at the throng, he wondered if any plan could prevent the wild outpouring of fanatic legions.
    Chani, nearing the ledge, was followed at a distance by four women carrying another woman in a litter.
    Jessica ignored Chani's approach, focusing all her attention on the woman in the litter--a crone, a wrinkled and shriveled ancient thing in a black gown with hood thrown back to reveal the tight knot of gray hair and the stringy neck.
    The litter-carriers deposited their burden gently on the ledge from below, and Chani helped the old woman to her feet. 
    So this is their Reverend Mother, Jessica thought.
    The old woman leaned heavily on Chani as she hobbled toward Jessica, looking like a collection of sticks draped in the black robe. She stopped in front of Jessica, peered upward for a long moment before speaking in a husky whisper.
    "So you're the one." The old head nodded once precariously on the thin neck. "The Shadout Mapes was right to pity you." 
    Jessica spoke quickly, scornfully: "I need no one's pity." 
    "That remains to be seen," husked the old woman. She turned with surprising quickness and faced the throng. "Tell them, Stilgar."
    "Must I?" he asked.
    "We are the people of Misr," the old woman rasped. "Since our Sunni ancestors fled from Nilotic al-Ourouba, we have known flight and death. The young go on that our people shall not die." 
    Stilgar took a deep breath, stepped forward two paces.
    Jessica felt the hush come over the crowded cavern--some twenty thousand people now, standing silently, almost without movement. It made her feel suddenly small and filled with caution.
    "Tonight we must leave this sietch that has sheltered us for so long and go south into the desert," Stilgar said. His voice boomed out across the uplifted faces, reverberating with the force given it by the acoustical horn behind the ledge. 
    Still the throng remained silent.
    "The Reverend Mother tells me she cannot survive another hajra," Stilgar said. "We have lived before without a Reverend Mother, but it is not good for people to seek a new home in such straits."
    Now, the throng stirred, rippling with whispers and currents of disquiet.
    "That this may not come to pass," Stilgar said, "our new Sayyadina Jessica of the Weirding, has consented to enter the rite at this time. She will attempt to pass within that we not lose the strength of our Reverend Mother."
    Jessica of the Weirding, Jessica thought. She saw Paul staring at her, his eyes filled with questions, but his mouth held silent by all the strangeness around them.
    If I die in the attempt, what will become of him? Jessica asked herself. Again she felt the misgivings fill her mind.
    Chani led the old Reverend Mother to a rock bench deep in the acoustical horn, returned to stand beside Stilgar.
    "That we may not lose all if Jessica of the Weirding should fail," Stilgar said, "Chani, daughter of Liet, will be consecrated in the Sayyadina at this time." He stepped one pace to the side.
    From deep in the acoustical horn, the old woman's voice came out to them, an amplified whisper, harsh and penetrating: "Chani has returned from her hajra--Chani has seen the waters." 
    A sussurant response arose from the crowd: "She has seen the waters."
    "I consecrate the daughter of Liet in the Sayyadina," husked the old woman.
    "She is accepted," the crowd responded.
    Paul barely heard the ceremony, his attention still centered on what had been said of his mother.
    If she should fail?
    He turned and looked back at the one they called Reverend Mother, studying the dried crone features, the fathomless blue fixation of her eyes. She looked as though a breeze would blow her away, yet there was that about her which suggested she might stand untouched in the path of a coriolis storm. She carried the same aura of power that he remembered from the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam who had tested him with agony in the way of the gom jabbar.
    "I, the Reverend Mother Ramallo, whose voice speaks as a multitude, say this to you," the old woman said. "It is fitting that Chani enter the Sayyadina." 
    "It is fitting," the crowd responded.
    The old woman nodded, whispered: "I give her the silver skies, the golden desert and its shining rocks, the green fields that will be. I give these to Sayyadina Chani. And lest she forget that she's servant of us all, to her fall the menial tasks in this Ceremony of the Seed. Let it be as Shai-hulud will have it." She lifted a brown-stick arm, dropped it.
    Jessica, feeling the ceremony close around her with a current that swept her beyond all turning back, glanced once at Paul's question filled face, then prepared herself for the ordeal.
    "Let the watermasters come forward," Chani said with only the slightest quaver of uncertainty in her girl-child voice.
    Now, Jessica felt herself at the focus of danger, knowing its presence in the watchfulness of the throng, in the silence.
    A band of men made its way through a serpentine path opened in the crowd, moving up from the back in pairs. Each pair carried a small skin sack, perhaps twice the size of a human head. The sacks sloshed heavily.
    The two leaders deposited their load at Chani's feet on the ledge and stepped back.
    Jessica looked at the sack, then at the men. They had their hoods thrown back, exposing long hair tied in a roll at the base of the neck. The black pits of their eyes stared back at her without wavering.
    A furry redolence of cinnamon arose from the sack, wafted across Jessica. The spice? she wondered. 
    "Is there water?" Chani asked.
    The watermaster on the left, a man with a purple scar line across the bridge of his nose, nodded once. "There is water, Sayyadina," he said, "but we cannot drink of it." 
    "Is there seed?" Chani asked. 
    "There is seed," the man said.
    Chani knelt and put her hands to the sloshing sack. "Blessed is the water and its seed." 
    There was familiarity to the rite, and Jessica looked back at the Reverend Mother Ramallo. The old woman's eyes were closed and she sat hunched over as though asleep. 
    "Sayyadina Jessica," Chani said.
    Jessica turned to see the girl staring up at her. 
    "Have you tasted the blessed water?" Chani asked.
    Before Jessica could answer, Chani said: "It is not possible that you have tasted the blessed water. You are outworlder and unprivileged."
    A sigh passed through the crowd, a sussuration of robes that made the nape hairs creep on Jessica's neck.
    "The crop was large and the maker has been destroyed," Chani said. She began unfastening a coiled spout fixed to the top of the sloshing sack.
    Now, Jessica felt the sense of danger boiling around her. She glanced at Paul, saw that he was caught up in the mystery of the ritual and had eyes only for Chani.
    Has he seen this moment in time? Jessica wondered. She rested a hand on her abdomen, thinking of the unborn daughter there, asking herself: Do I have the right to risk us both?
    Chani lifted the spout toward Jessica, said: "Here is the Water of Life, the water that is greater than water--Kan, the water that frees the soul. If you be a Reverend Mother, it opens the universe to you. Let Shai-hulud judge now."
    Jessica felt herself torn between duty to her unborn child and duty to Paul. For Paul, she knew, she should take that spout and drink of the sack's contents, but as she bent to the proffered spout, her senses told her its peril.
    The stuff in the sack had a bitter smell subtly akin to many poisons that she knew, but unlike them, too. 
    "You must drink it now," Chani said.
    There's no turning back, Jessica reminded herself. But nothing in all her Bene Gesserit training came into her mind to help her through this instant.
    What is it? Jessica asked, herself. Liquor? A drug?
    She bent over the spout, smelled the esters of cinnamon, remembering then the drunkenness of Duncan Idaho. Spice liquor? she asked herself. She took the siphon tube in her mouth, pulled up only the most minuscule sip. It tasted of the spice, a faint bite acrid on the tongue.
    Chani pressed down on the skin bag. A great gulp of the stuff surged into Jessica's mouth and before she could help herself, she swallowed it, fighting to retain her calmness and dignity.
    "To accept a little death is worse than death itself," Chani said. She stared at Jessica, waiting.
    And Jessica stared back, still holding the spout in her mouth. She tasted the sack's contents in her nostrils, in the roof of her mouth, in her cheeks, in her eyes--a biting sweetness, now. 
    Cool.
    Again, Chani sent the liquid gushing into Jessica's mouth. 
    Delicate.
    Jessica studied Chani's face--elfin features--seeing the traces of Liet-Kynes there as yet unfixed by time. 
    This is a drug they feed me, Jessica told herself.
    But it was unlike any other drug of her experience, and Bene Gesserit training included the taste of many drugs. 
    Chani's features were so clear, as though outlined in light. 
    A drug.
    Whirling silence settled around Jessica. Every fiber of her body accepted the fact that something profound had happened to it. She felt that she was a conscious mote, smaller than any subatomic particle, yet capable of motion and of sensing her surroundings. Like an abrupt revelation--the curtains whipped away--she realized she had become aware of a psychokinesthetic extension of herself. She was the mote, yet not the mote.
    The cavern remained around her--the people. She sensed them: Paul, Chani, Stilgar, the Reverend Mother Ramallo. 
    Reverend Mother!
    At the school there had been rumors that some did not survive the Reverend Mother ordeal, that the drug took them.
    Jessica focused her attention on the Reverend Mother Ramallo, aware now that all this was happening in a frozen instant of time--suspended time for her alone.
    Why is time suspended? she asked herself. She stared at the frozen expressions around her, seeing a dust mote above Chani's head, stopped there. 
    Waiting.
    The answer to this instant came like an explosion in her consciousness: her personal time was suspended to save her life.
    She focused on the psychokinesthetic extension of herself, looking within, and was confronted immediately with a cellular core, a pit of blackness from which she recoiled.
    That is the place where we cannot look, she thought. There is the place the Reverend Mothers are so reluctant to mention--the place where only a Kwisatz Haderach may look.
    This realization returned a small measure of confidence, and again she ventured to focus on the psychokinesthetic extension, becoming a mote-self that searched within her for danger. 
    She found it within the drug she had swallowed.
    The stuff was dancing particles within her, its motions so rapid that even frozen time could not stop them. Dancing particles. She began recognizing familiar structures, atomic linkages: a carbon atom here, helical wavering . . . a glucose molecule. An entire chain of molecules confronted her, and she recognized a protein . . . a methyl-protein configuration. 
    Ah-h-h!
    It was a soundless mental sigh within her as she saw the nature of the poison.
    With her psychokinesthetic probing, she moved into it, shifted an oxygen mote, allowed another carbon mote to link, reattached a linkage of oxygen . . . hydrogen.
    The change spread . . . faster and faster as the catalyzed reaction opened its surface of contact.
    The suspension of time relaxed its hold upon her, and she sensed motion. The tube spout from the sack was touched to her mouth--gently, collecting a drop of moisture.
    Chani's taking the catalyst from my body to change the poison in that sack, Jessica thought. Why?
    Someone eased her to a sitting position. She saw the old Reverend Mother Ramallo being brought to sit beside her on the carpeted ledge. A dry hand touched her neck.
    And there was another psychokinesthetic mote within her awareness! Jessica tried to reject it, but the mote swept closer . . . closer.
    They touched!
    It was like an ultimate simpatico, being two people at once: not telepathy, but mutual awareness. 
    With the old Reverend Mother!
    But Jessica saw that the Reverend Mother didn't think of herself as old. An image unfolded before the mutual mind's eye: a young girl with a dancing spirit and tender humor.
    Within the mutual awareness, the young girl said, "Yes, that is how I am." 
    Jessica could only accept the words, not respond to them. 
    "You'll have it all soon, Jessica," the inward image said. 
    This is hallucination, Jessica told herself.
    "You know better than that," the inward image said. "Swiftly now, do not fight me. There isn't much time. We . . . " There came a long pause, then; "You should've told us you were pregnant!"
    Jessica found the voice that talked within the mutual awareness. "Why?" 
    "This changes both of you! Holy Mother, what have we done?" 
    Jessica sensed a forced shift in the mutual awareness, saw another mote-presence with the inward eye. The other mote darted wildly here, there, circling. It radiated pure terror.
    "You'll have to be strong," the old Reverend Mother's image-presence said. "Be thankful it's a daughter you carry. This would've killed a male fetus. Now . . . carefully, gently . . . touch your daughter-presence. Be your daughter-presence. Absorb the fear . . . soothe . . . use your courage and your strength . . . gently now . . . gently . . . "
    The other whirling mote swept near, and Jessica compelled herself to touch it.
    Terror threatened to overwhelm her.
    She fought it the only way she knew: "I shall not fear. Fear is the mind killer . . . "
    The litany brought a semblance of calm. The other mote lay quiescent against her.
    Words won't work, Jessica told herself.
    She reduced herself to basic emotional reactions, radiated love, comfort, a warm snuggling of protection. 
    The terror receded.
    Again, the presence of the old Reverend Mother asserted itself, but now there was a tripling of mutual awareness--two active and one that lay quietly absorbing.
    "Time compels me," the Reverend Mother said within the awareness. "I have much to give you. And I do not know if your daughter can accept all this while remaining sane. But it must be: the needs of the tribe are paramount." 
    "What--" 
    "Remain silent and accept!"
    Experiences began to unroll before Jessica. It was like a lecture strip in a subliminal training projector at the Bene Gesserit school . . . but faster . . . blindingly faster. 
    Yet . . . distinct.
    She knew each experience as it happened: there was a lover--virile, bearded, with the Fremen eyes, and Jessica saw his strength and tenderness, all of him in one blink-moment, through the Reverend Mother's memory.
    There was no time now to think of what this might be doing to the daughter fetus, only time to accept and record. The experiences poured in on Jessica--birth, life, death--important matters and unimportant, an outpouring of single-view time.
    Why should a fall of sand from a clifftop stick in the memory? she asked herself.
    Too late, Jessica saw what was happening: the old woman was dying and, in dying, pouring her experiences into Jessica's awareness as water is poured into a cup. The other mote faded back into pre-birth awareness as Jessica watched it. And, dying-in-conception, the old Reverend Mother left her life in Jessica's memory with one last sighing blur of words.
    "I've been a long time waiting for you," she said. "Here is my life." 
    There it was, encapsuled, all of it. 
    Even the moment of death.
    I am now a Reverend Mother, Jessica realized.
    And she knew with a generalized awareness that she had become, in truth, precisely what was meant by a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother. The poison drug had transformed her.
    This wasn't exactly how they did it at the Bene Gesserit school, she knew. No one had ever introduced her to the mysteries of it, but she knew.
    The end result was the same.
    Jessica sensed the daughter-mote still touching her inner awareness, probed it without response.
    A terrible sense of loneliness crept through Jessica in the realization of what had happened to her. She saw her own life as a pattern that had slowed and all life around her speeded up so that the dancing interplay became clearer.
    The sensation of mote-awareness faded slightly, its intensity easing as her body relaxed from the threat of the poison, but still she felt that other mote, touching it with a sense of guilt at what she had allowed to happen to it.
    I did it, my poor, unformed, dear little daughter, I brought you into this universe and exposed your awareness to all its varieties without any defenses.
    A tiny outflowing of love-comfort, like a reflection of what she had poured into it, came from the other mote.
    Before Jessica could respond, she felt the adab presence of demanding memory. There was something that needed doing. She groped for it, realizing she was being impeded by a muzziness of the changed drug permeating her senses.
    I could change that, she thought. I could take away the drug action and make it harmless. But she sensed this would be an error. I'm within a rite of joining.
    Then she knew what she had to do.
    Jessica opened her eyes, gestured to the watersack now being held above her by Chani.
    "It has been blessed," Jessica said. "Mingle the waters, let the change come to all, that the people may partake and share in the blessing."
    Let the catalyst do its work, she thought. Let the people drink of it and have their awareness of each other heightened for awhile. The drug is safe now . . . now that a Reverend Mother has changed it.
    Still, the demanding memory worked on her, thrusting. There was another thing she had to do, she realized, but the drug made it difficult to focus.
    Ah-h-h-h-h . . . the old Reverend Mother.
    "I have met the Reverend Mother Ramallo," Jessica said. "She is gone, but she remains. Let her memory be honored in the rite. 
    Now, where did I get those words? Jessica wondered.
    And she realized they came from another memory, the life that had been given to her and now was part of herself. Something about that gift felt incomplete, though.
    "Let them have their orgy," the other-memory said within her. "They've little enough pleasure out of living. Yes, and you and I need this little time to become acquainted before I recede and pour out through your memories. Already, I feel myself being tied to bits of you. Ah-h-h, you've a mind filled with interesting things. So many things I'd never imagined."
    And the memory-mind encapsulated within her opened itself to Jessica, permitting a view down a wide corridor to other Reverend Mothers until there seemed no end to them.
    Jessica recoiled, fearing she would become lost in an ocean of oneness. Still, the corridor remained, revealing to Jessica that the Fremen culture was far older than she had suspected.
    There had been Fremen on Poritrin, she saw, a people grown soft with an easy planet, fair game for Imperial raiders to harvest and plant human colonies on Bela Tegeuse and Salusa Secundus. 
    Oh, the wailing Jessica sensed in that parting.
    Far down the corridor, an image-voice screamed: "They denied us the Hajj!"
    Jessica saw the slave cribs on Bela Tegeuse down that inner corridor, saw the weeding out and the selecting that spread men to Rossak and Harmonthep. Scenes of brutal ferocity opened to her like the petals of a terrible flower. And she saw the thread of the past carried by Sayyadina after Sayyadina--first by word of mouth, hidden in the sand chanteys, then refined through their own Reverend Mothers with the discovery of the poison drug on Rossak . . . and now developed to subtle strengthen Arrakis in the discovery of the Water of Life.
    Far down the inner corridor, another voice screamed: "Never to forgive! Never to forget!"
    But Jessica's attention was focused on the revelation of the Water of Life, seeing its source: the liquid exhalation of a dying sandworm, a maker. And as she saw the killing of it in her new memory, she suppressed a gasp. 
    The creature was drowned! 
    "Mother, are you all right?"
    Paul's voice intruded on her, and Jessica struggled out of the inner awareness to stare up at him, conscious of duty to him, but resenting his presence.
    I'm like a person whose hands were kept numb, without sensation from the first moment of awareness--until one day the ability to feel is forced into them.
    The thought hung in her mind, an enclosing awareness.
    And I say: "Look! I have no hands!" But the people all around me say: "What are hands?" " 
    "Are you all right?" Paul repeated. 
    "Yes."
    "Is this all right for me to drink?" He gestured to the sack in Chani's hands. "They want me to drink it."
    She heard the hidden meaning in his words, realized he had detected the poison in the original, unchanged substance, that he was concerned for her. It occurred to Jessica then to wonder about the limits of Paul's prescience. His question revealed much to her.
    "You may drink it," she said. "It has been changed." And she looked beyond him to see Stilgar staring down at her, the dark-dark eyes studying.
    "Now, we know you cannot be false," he said.
    She sensed hidden meaning here, too, but the muzziness of the drug was overpowering her senses. How warm it was and soothing. How beneficent these Fremen to bring her into the fold of such companionship.
    Paul saw the drug take hold of his mother.
    He searched his memory--the fixed past, the flux-lines of the possible futures. It was like scanning through arrested instants of time, disconcerting to the lens of the inner eye. The fragments were difficult to understand when snatched out of the flux.
    This drug--he could assemble knowledge about it, understand what it was doing to his mother, but the knowledge lacked a natural rhythm, lacked a system of mutual reflection.
    He realized suddenly that it was one thing to see the past occupying the present, but the true test of prescience was to see the past in the future.
    Things persisted in not being what they seemed.
    "Drink it," Chani said. She waved the hornspout of a watersack under his nose.
    Paul straightened, staring at Chani. He felt carnival excitement in the air. He knew what would happen if he drank this spice drug with its quintessence of the substance that brought the change onto him. He would return to the vision of pure time, of time-become-space. It would perch him on the dizzying summit and defy him to understand.
    From behind Chani, Stilgar said: "Drink it, lad. You delay the rite."
    Paul listened to the crowd then, hearing the wildness in their voices--"Lisan al-Gaib," they said. "Muad'Dib!" He looked down at his mother. She appeared peacefully asleep in a sitting position--her breathing even and deep. A phrase out of the future that was his lonely past came into his mind: "She sleeps in the Waters of Life." 
    Chani tugged at his sleeve.
    Paul took the hornspout into his mouth, hearing the people shout. He felt the liquid gush into his throat as Chani pressed the sack, sensed giddiness in the fumes. Chani removed the spout, handed the sack into hands that reached for it from the floor of the cavern. His eyes focused on her arm, the green band of mourning there.
    As she straightened, Chani saw the direction of his gaze, said: "I can mourn him even in the happiness of the waters. This was something he gave us." She put her hand into his, pulling him along the ledge. "We are alike in a thing, Usul: We have each lost a father to the Harkonnens."
    Paul followed her. He felt that his head had been separated from his body and restored with odd connections. His legs were remote and rubbery.
    They entered a narrow side passage, its walls dimly lighted by spaced-out glowglobes. Paul felt the drug beginning to have its unique effect on him, opening time like a flower. He found need to steady himself against Chani as they turned through another shadowed tunnel. The mixture of whipcord and softness he felt beneath her robe stirred his blood. The sensation mingled with the work of the drug, folding future and past into the present, leaving him the thinnest margin of trinocular focus.
    "I know you, Chani," he whispered. "We've sat upon a ledge above the sand while I soothed your fears. We've caressed in the dark of the sietch. We've . . . " He found himself losing focus, tried to shake his head, stumbled.
    Chani steadied him, led him through thick hangings into the yellow warmth of a private apartment--tow tables, cushions, a sleeping pad beneath an orange spread.
    Paul grew aware that they had stopped, that Chani stood facing him, and that her eyes betrayed a look of quiet terror. 
    "You must tell me," she whispered. 
    "You are Sihaya," he said, "the desert spring." 
    "When the tribe shares the Water," she said, "we're together--all of us. We . . . share. I can . . . sense the others with me, but I'm afraid to share with you." 
    "Why?"
    He tried to focus on her, but past and future were merging into the present, blurring her image. He saw her in countless ways and positions and settings.
    "There's something frightening in you," she said. "When I took you away from the others . . . I did it because I could feel what the others wanted. You . . . press on people. You . . . make us see things!" 
    He forced himself to speak distinctly: "What do you see?" 
    She looked down at her hands. "I see a child . . . in my arms. It's our child, yours and mine." She put a hand to her mouth. "How can I know every feature of you?"
    They've a little of the talent, his mind told him. But they suppress it because it terrifies.
    In a moment of clarity, he saw how Chani was trembling. 
    "What is it you want to say?" he asked. 
    "Usul," she whispered, and still she trembled. 
    "You cannot back into the future," he said.
    A profound compassion for her swept through him. He pulled her against him, stroked her head. "Chani, Chani, don't fear." 
    "Usul, help me," she cried.
    As she spoke, he felt the drug complete its work within him, ripping away the curtains to let him see the distant gray turmoil of his future.
    "You're so quiet," Chani said.
    He held himself poised in the awareness, seeing time stretch out in its weird dimension, delicately balanced yet whirling, narrow yet spread like a net gathering countless worlds and forces, a tightwire that he must walk, yet a teeter-totter on which he balanced.
    On one side he could see the Imperium, a Harkonnen called Feyd-Rautha who flashed toward him like a deadly blade, the Sardaukar raging off their planet to spread pogrom on Arrakis, the Guild conniving and plotting, the Bene Gesserit with their scheme of selective breeding. They lay massed like a thunderhead on his horizon, held back by no more than the Fremen and their Muad'Dib, the sleeping giant Fremen poised for their wild crusade across the universe.
    Paul felt himself at the center, at the pivot where the whole structure turned, walking a thin wire of peace with a measure of happiness, Chani at his side. He could see it stretching ahead of him, a time of relative quiet in a hidden sietch, a moment of peace between periods of violence.
    "There's no other place for peace," he said.
    "Usul, you're crying," Chani murmured. "Usul, my strength, do you give moisture to the dead? To whose dead?" 
    "To ones not yet dead," he said.
    "Then let them have their time of life," she said.
    He sensed through the drug fog how right she was, pulled her against him with savage pressure. "Sihaya!" he said.
    She put a palm against his cheek, "I'm no longer afraid, Usul. Look at me. I see what you see when you hold me thus." 
    "What do you see?" he demanded.
    "I see us giving love to each other in a time of quiet between storms. It's what we were meant to do."
    The drug had him again and he thought: So many times you've given me comfort and forgetfulness. He felt anew the hyperillumination with its high-relief imagery of time, sensed his future becoming memories--the tender indignities of physical love, the sharing and communion of selves, the softness and the violence. 
    "You're the strong one, Chani," he muttered. "Stay with me. " 
    "Always," she said, and kissed his cheek.

= = = = = =

Book Three
THE PROPHET

= = = = = =

No woman, no man, no child ever was deeply intimate with my father. The closest anyone ever came to casual camaraderie with the Padishah Emperor was the relationship offered by Count Hasimir Fenring, a companion from childhood. The measure of Count Fenring's friendship may be seen first in a positive thing: he allayed the Landsraad's suspicions after the Arrakis Affair. It cost more than a billion solaris in spice bribes, so my mother said, and there were other gifts as well: slave women, royal honors, and tokens of rank. The second major evidence of the Count's friendship was negative. He refused to kill a man even though it was within his capabilities and my father commanded it. I will relate this presently.
-"Count Fenring: A Profile" by the Princess Irulan

    The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen raged down the corridor from his private apartments, flitting through patches of late afternoon sunlight that poured down from high windows. He bobbed and twisted in his suspensors with violent movements.
    Past the private kitchen he stormed -- past the library, past the small reception room and into the servants' antechamber where the evening relaxation already had set in.
    The guard captain, Iakin Nefud, squatted on a divan across the chamber, the stupor of semuta dullness in his flat face, the eerie wailing of semuta music around him. His own court sat near to do his bidding.
    "Nefud!" the Baron roared. 
    Men scrambled.
    Nefud stood, his face composed by the narcotic but with an overlay of paleness that told of his fear. The semuta music had stopped.
    "My Lord Baron," Nefud said. Only the drug kept the trembling out of his voice.
    The Baron scanned the faces around him, seeing the looks of frantic quiet in them. He returned his attention to Nefud, and spoke in a silken tone:
    "How long have you been my guard captain, Nefud?" 
    Nefud swallowed. "Since Arrakis, my Lord. Almost two years."
    "And have you always anticipated dangers to my person?" 
    "Such has been my only desire, my Lord." 
    "Then where is Feyd-Rautha?" the Baron roared. 
    Nefud recoiled. "M'Lord?"
    "You do not consider Feyd-Rautha a danger to my person?" Again, the voice was silken.
    Nefud wet his lips with his tongue. Some of the semuta dullness left his eyes. "Feyd-Rautha's in the slave quarters, my Lord." 
    "With the women again, eh?" The Baron trembled with the effort of suppressing anger. 
    "Sire, it could be he's --" 
    "Silence!"
    The Baron advanced another step into the antechamber, noting how the men moved back, clearing a subtle space around Nefud, dissociating themselves from the object of wrath.
    "Did I not command you to know precisely where the na-Baron was at all times?" the Baron asked. He moved a step closer. "Did I not say to you that you were to know precisely what the na-Baron was saying at all times -- and to whom?" Another step. "Did I not say to you that you were to tell me whenever he went into the quarters of the slave women?" 
    Nefud swallowed. Perspiration stood out on his forehead.
    The Baron held his voice flat, almost devoid of emphasis: "Did I not say these things to you?" 
    Nefud nodded.
    "And did I not say to that you were to check all slave boys sent to me and that you were to do this yourself . . . personally?" 
    Again, Nefud nodded.
    "Did you, perchance, not see the blemish on the thigh of the one sent me this evening?" the Baron asked. "Is it possible you --" 
    "Uncle."
    The Baron whirled, stared at Feyd-Rautha standing in the doorway. The presence of his nephew here, now -- the look of hurry that the young man could not quite conceal -- all revealed much. Feyd-Rautha had his own spy system focused on the Baron.
    "There is a body in my chambers that I wish removed," the Baron said, and he kept his hand at the projectile weapon beneath his robes, thankful that his shield was the best.
    Feyd-Rautha glanced at two guardsmen against the right wall, nodded. The two detached themselves, scurried out the door and down the hall toward the Baron's apartments.
    Those two, eh? the Baron thought. Ah, this young monster has much to learn yet about conspiracy!
    "I presume you left matters peaceful in the slave quarters, Feyd," the Baron said.
    "I've been playing cheops with the slavemaster," Feyd-Rautha said, and he thought: What has gone wrong? The boy we sent to my uncle has obviously been killed. But he was perfect for the job. Even Hawat couldn't have made a better choice. The boy was perfect!
    "Playing pyramid chess," the Baron said. "How nice. Did you win?"
    "I . . . ah, yes, Uncle." And Feyd-Rautha strove to contain his disquiet.
    The Baron snapped his fingers. "Nefud, you wish to be restored to my good graces?" 
    "Sire, what have I done?" Nefud quavered.
    "That's unimportant now," the Baron said. "Feyd has beaten the slavemaster at cheops. Did you hear that?" 
    "Yes . . . Sire."
    "I wish you to take three men and go to the slavemaster," the Baron said. "Garrote the slavemaster. Bring his body to me when you've finished that I may see it was done properly. We cannot have such inept chess players in our employ." 
    Feyd-Rautha went pale, took a step forward. "But, Uncle, I --" 
    "Later, Feyd," the Baron said, and waved a hand. "Later." 
    The two guards who had gone to the Baron's quarters for the slave boy's body staggered past the antechamber door with their load sagging between them, arms trailing. The Baron watched until they were out of sight.
    Nefud stepped up beside the Baron. "You wish me to kill the slavemaster, now, my Lord?"
    "Now," the Baron said. "And when you've finished, add those two who just passed to your list. I don't like the way they carried that body. One should do such things neatly. I'll wish to see their carcasses, too." 
    Nefud said, "My Lord, is it anything that I've --" 
    "Do as your master has ordered," Feyd-Rautha said. And he thought: All I can hope for now is to save my own skin.
    Good! the Baron thought. He yet knows how to cut his losses. And the Baron smiled inwardly at himself, thinking: The lad knows, too, what will please me and be most apt to stay my wrath from falling on him. He knows I must preserve him. Who else do I have who could take the reins I must leave someday? I have no other as capable. But he must learn! And I must preserve myself while he's learning.
    Nefud signaled men to assist him, led them out the door.
    "Would you accompany me to my chambers, Feyd?" the Baron asked.
    "I am yours to command," Feyd-Rautha said. He bowed, thinking: I'm caught.
    "After you," the Baron said, and he gestured to the door.
    Feyd-Rautha indicated his fear by only the barest hesitation. Have I failed utterly? he asked himself. Will he slip a poisoned blade into my back . . . slowly, through the shield? Does he have an alternative successor?
    Let him experience this moment of terror, the Baron thought as he walked along behind his nephew. He will succeed me, but at a time of my choosing. I'll not have him throwing away what I've built!
    Feyd-Rautha tried not to walk too swiftly. He felt the skin crawling on his back as though his body itself wondered when the blow could come. His muscles alternately tensed and relaxed.
    "Have you heard the latest word from Arrakis?" the Baron asked.
    "No, Uncle."
    Feyd-Rautha forced himself not to look back. He turned down the hall out of the servants' wing.
    "They've a new prophet or religious leader of some kind among the Fremen," the Baron said. "They call him Muad'Dib. Very funny, really. It means 'the Mouse.' I've told Rabban to let them have their religion. It'll keep them occupied."
    "That's very interesting, Uncle," Feyd-Rautha said. He turned into the private corridor to his uncle's quarters, wondering: Why does he talk about religion? Is it some subtle hint to me? 
    "Yes, isn't it?" the Baron said.
    They came into the Baron's apartments through the reception salon to the bedchamber. Subtle signs of a struggle greeted them here -- a suspensor lamp displaced, a bedcushion on the floor, a soother-reel spilled open across a bedstand.
    "It was a clever plan," the Baron said. He kept his body shield tuned to maximum, stopped, facing his nephew. "But not clever enough. Tell me, Feyd, why didn't you strike me down yourself? You've had opportunity enough."
    Feyd-Rautha found a suspensor chair, accomplished a mental shrug as he sat down in it without being asked. 
    I must be bold now, he thought.
    "You taught me that my own hands must remain clean," he said.
    "Ah, yes," the Baron said. "When you face the Emperor, you must be able to say truthfully that you did not do the deed. The witch at the Emperor's elbow will hear your words and know their truth or falsehood. Yes. I warned you about that."
    "Why haven't you ever bought a Bene Gesserit, Uncle?" Feyd-Rautha asked. "With a Truthsayer at your side  --" 
    "You know my tastes!" the Baron snapped.
    Feyd-Rautha studied his uncle, said: "Still, one would be valuable for --"
    "I trust them not!" the Baron snarled. "And stop trying to change the subject!" 
    Feyd-Rautha spoke mildly; "As you wish, Uncle." 
    "I remember a time in the arena several years ago," the Baron said. "It seemed there that day a slave had been set to kill you. Is that truly how it was?" 
    "It's been so long ago, Uncle. After all, I --"
    "No evasions, please," the Baron said, and the tightness of his voice exposed the rein on his anger.
    Feyd-Rautha looked at his uncle, thinking: He knows, else he wouldn't ask.
    "It was a sham, Uncle. I arranged it to discredit your slavemaster."
    "Very clever," the Baron said. "Brave, too. That slave-gladiator almost took you, didn't he?" 
    "Yes."
    "If you had finesse and subtlety to match such courage, you'd be truly formidable." The Baron shook his head from side to side. And as he had done many times since that terrible day on Arrakis, he found himself regretting the loss of Piter, the Mentat. There'd been a man of delicate, devilish subtlety. It hadn't saved him, though. Again, the Baron shook his head. Fate was sometimes inscrutable.
    Feyd-Rautha glanced around the bedchamber, studying the signs of the struggle, wondering how his uncle had overcome the slave they'd prepared so carefully.
    "How did I best him?" the Baron asked. "Ah-h-h, now, Feyd -- let me keep some weapons to preserve me in my old age. It's better we use this time to strike a bargain."
    Feyd-Rautha stared at him. A bargain! He means to keep me as his heir for certain, then. Else why bargain. One bargains with equals or near equals!
    "What bargain, Uncle?" And Feyd-Rautha felt proud that his voice remained calm and reasonable, betraying none of the elation that filled him.
    The Baron, too, noted the control. He nodded. "You're good material, Feyd. I don't waste good material. You persist, however, in refusing to learn my true value to you. You are obstinate. You do not see why I should be preserved as someone of the utmost value to you. This . . . " He gestured at the evidence of the struggle in the bedchamber. "This was foolishness. I do not reward foolishness." 
    Get to the point, you old fool! Feyd-Rautha thought.
    "You think of me as an old fool," the Baron said. "I must dissuade you of that." 
    "You speak of a bargain."
    "Ah, the impatience of youth," the Baron said. "Well, this is the substance of it, then: You will cease these foolish attempts on my life. And I, when you are ready for it, will step aside in your favor. I will retire to an advisory position, leaving you in the seat of power." 
    "Retire, Uncle?"
    "You still think me the fool," the Baron said, "and this but confirms it, eh? You think I'm begging you! Step cautiously, Feyd. This old fool saw through the shielded needle you'd planted in that slave boy's thigh. Right where I'd put my hand on it, eh? The smallest pressure and -- snick! A poison needle in the old fool's palm! Ah-h-h, Feyd . . . "
    The Baron shook his head, thinking: It would've worked, too, if Hawat hadn't warned me. Well, let the lad believe I saw the plot on my own. In a way, I did. I was the one who saved Hawat from the wreckage of Arrakis. And this lad needs greater respect for my prowess.
    Feyd-Rautha remained silent, struggling, with himself. Is he being truthful? Does he really mean to retire? Why not? I'm sure to succeed him one day if I move carefully. He can't live forever. Perhaps it was foolish to try hurrying the process.
    "You speak of a bargain," Feyd-Rautha said. "What pledge do we give to bind it?"
    "How can we trust each other, eh?" the Baron asked. "Well, Feyd, as for you: I'm setting Thufir Hawat to watch over you. I trust Hawat's Mentat capabilities in this. Do you understand me? And as for me, you'll have to take me on faith. But I can't live forever, can I, Feyd? And perhaps you should begin to suspect now that there're things I know which you should know."
    "I give you my pledge and what do you give me?" Feyd-Rautha asked.
    "I let you go on living," the Baron said.
    Again, Feyd-Rautha studied his uncle. He sets Hawat over me! What would he say if I told him Hawat planned the trick with the gladiator that cost him his slavemaster? He'd likely say I was lying in the attempt to discredit Hawat. No, the good Thufir is a Mentat and has anticipated this moment.
    "Well, what do you say?" the Baron asked. 
    "What can I say? I accept, of course."
    And Feyd-Rautha thought: Hawat! He plays both ends against the middle . . . is that it? Has he moved to my uncle's camp because I didn't counsel with him over the slave boy attempt?
    "You haven't said anything about my setting Hawat to watch you," the Baron said.
    Feyd-Rautha betrayed anger by a flaring of nostrils. The name of Hawat had been a danger signal in the Harkonnen family for so many years . . . and now it had a new meaning: still dangerous. 
    "Hawat's a dangerous toy," Feyd-Rautha said.
    "Toy! Don't be stupid. I know what I have in Hawat and how to control it. Hawat has deep emotions, Feyd. The man without emotions is the one to fear. But deep emotions . . . ah, now, those can be bent to your needs." 
    "Uncle, I don't understand you." 
    "Yes, that's plain enough."
    Only a flicker of eyelids betrayed the passage of resentment through Feyd-Rautha.
    "And you do not understand Hawat," the Baron said. 
    Nor do you! Feyd-Rautha thought.
    "Who does Hawat blame for his present circumstances?" the Baron asked. "Me? Certainly. But he was an Atreides tool and bested me for years until the Imperium took a hand. That's how he sees it. His hate for me is a casual thing now. He believes he can best me any time. Believing this, he is bested. For I direct his attention where I want it -- against the Imperium."
    Tensions of a new understanding drew tight lines across Feyd-Rautha's forehead, thinned his mouth. "Against the Emperor?" 
    Let my dear nephew try the taste of that, the Baron thought. Let him say to himself: "The Emperor Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen!" Let him ask himself how much that's worth. Surely it must be worth the life of one old uncle who could make that dream come to pass!
    Slowly, Feyd-Rautha wet his lips with his tongue. Could it be true what the old fool was saying? There was more here than there seemed to be.
    "And what has Hawat to do with this?" Feyd-Rautha asked. 
    "He thinks he uses us to wreak his revenge upon the Emperor." 
    "And when that's accomplished?" 
    "He does not think beyond his revenge. Hawat's a man who must serve others, and doesn't even know this about himself." 
    "I've learned much from Hawat," Feyd-Rautha agreed, and felt the truth of the words as he spoke them. "But the more I learn, the more I feel we should dispose of him . . . and soon." 
    "You don't like the idea of his watching you?" 
    "Hawat watches everybody."
    "And he may put you on a throne. Hawat is subtle. He is dangerous, devious. But I'll not yet withhold the antidote from him. A sword is dangerous, too, Feyd. We have the scabbard for this one, though. The poison's in him. When we withdraw the antidote, death will sheathe him."
    "In a way, it's like the arena," Feyd-Rautha said. "Feints within feints within feints. You watch to see which way the gladiator leans, which way he looks, how he holds his knife."
    He nodded to himself, seeing that these words pleased his uncle, but thinking: Yes! Like the arena! And the cutting edge is the mind!
    "Now you see how you need me," the Baron said. "I'm yet of use, Feyd."
    A sword to be wielded until he's too blunt for use, Feyd-Rautha thought.
    "Yes, Uncle, "he said.
    "And now," the Baron said, "we will go down to the slave quarters, we two. And I will watch while you, with your own hands, kill all the women in the pleasure wing."
    "Uncle!"
    "There will be other women, Feyd. But I have said that you do not make a mistake casually with me." 
    Feyd-Rautha's face darkened. "Uncle, you --" 
    "You will accept your punishment and learn something from it," the Baron said.
    Feyd-Rautha met the gloating stare in his uncle's eyes. And I must remember this night, he thought. And remembering it, I must remember other nights.
    "You will not refuse," the Baron said.
    What could you do if I refused, old man? Feyd-Rautha asked himself. But he knew there might be some other punishment, perhaps a more subtle one, a more brutal lever to bend him. 
    "I know you, Feyd," the Baron said. "You will not refuse." 
    All right, Feyd-Rautha thought. I need you now. I see that. The bargain's made. But I'll not always need you. And . . . someday . . . 

= = = = = =

Deep in the human unconscious is a pervasive need for a logical universe that makes sense. But the real universe is always one step beyond logic.
-from "The Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    I've sat across from many rulers of Great Houses, but never seen a more gross and dangerous pig than this one, Thufir Hawat told himself.
    "You may speak plainly with me, Hawat," the Baron rumbled. He leaned back in his suspensor chair, the eyes in their folds of fat boring into Hawat.
    The old Mentat looked down at the table between him and the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, noting the opulence of its grain. Even this was a factor to consider in assessing the Baron, as were the red walls of this private conference room and the faint sweet herb scent that hung on the air, masking a deeper musk.
    "You didn't have me send that warning to Rabban as an idle whim," the Baron said.
    Hawat's leathery old face remained impassive, betraying none of the loathing he felt. "I suspect many things, my Lord," he said.
    "Yes. Well, I wish to know how Arrakis figures in your suspicions about Salusa Secundus. It is not enough that you say to me the Emperor is in a ferment about some association between Arrakis and his mysterious prison planet. Now, I rushed the warning out to Rabban only because the courier had to leave on that Heighliner. You said there could be no delay. Well and good. But now I will have an explanation."
    He babbles too much, Hawat thought. He's not like Leto who could tell me a thing with the lift of an eyebrow or the wave of a hand. Nor like the Old Duke who could express an entire sentence in the way he accented a single word. This is a clod! Destroying him will be a service to mankind.
    "You will not leave here until I've had a full and complete explanation," the Baron said.
    "You speak too casually of Salusa Secundus," Hawat said.
    "It's a penal colony," the Baron said. "The worst riff-raff in the galaxy are sent to Salusa Secundus. What else do we need to know?"
    "That conditions on the prison planet are more oppressive than anywhere else," Hawat said. "You hear that the mortality rate among new prisoners is higher than sixty per cent. You hear that the Emperor practices every form of oppression there. You hear all this and do not ask questions?"
    "The Emperor doesn't permit the Great Houses to inspect his prison," the Baron growled. "But he hasn't seen into my dungeons, either."
    "And curiosity about Salusa Secundus is . . . ah . . . " Hawat put a bony finger to his lips. ". . . discouraged." 
    "So he's not proud of some of the things he must do there!" 
    Hawat allowed the faintest of smiles to touch his dark lips. His eyes glinted in the glowtube light as he stared at the Baron. "And you've never wondered where the Emperor gets his Sardaukar?" 
    The Baron pursed his fat lips. This gave his features the look of a pouting baby, and his voice carried a tone of petulance as he said: "Why . . . he recruits . . . that is to say, there are the levies and he enlists from --"
    "Faaa!" Hawat snapped. "The stories you hear about the exploits of the Sardaukar, they're not rumors, are they? Those are first-hand accounts from the limited number of survivors who've fought against the Sardaukar, eh?"
    "The Sardaukar are excellent fighting men, no doubt of it," the Baron said. "But I think my own legions --"
    "A pack of holiday excursionists by comparison!" Hawat snarled. "You think I don't know why the Emperor turned against House Atreides?"
    "This is not a realm open to your speculation," the Baron warned.
    Is it possible that even he doesn't know what motivated the Emperor in this? Hawat asked himself.
    "Any area is open to my speculation if it does what you've hired me to do," Hawat said. "I am a Mentat. You do not withhold information or computation lines from a Mentat." 
    For a long minute, the Baron stared at him, then: "Say what you must say. Mentat."
    "The Padishah Emperor turned against House Atreides because the Duke's Warmasters Gurney Halleck and Duncan Idaho had trained a fighting force -- a small fighting force -- to within a hair as good as the Sardaukar. Some of them were even better. And the Duke was in a position to enlarge his force, to make it every bit as strong as the Emperor's."
    The Baron weighed this disclosure, then: "What has Arrakis to do with this?"
    "It provides a pool of recruits already conditioned to the bitterest survival training." 
    The Baron shook his head. "You cannot mean the Fremen?" 
    "I mean the Fremen."
    "Hah! Then why warn Rabban? There cannot be more than a handful of Fremen left after the Sardaukar pogrom and Rabban's oppression." 
    Hawat continued to stare at him silently.
    "Not more than a handful!" the baron repeated. "Rabban killed six thousand of them last year alone!" 
    Still, Hawat stared at him.
    "And the year before it was nine thousand," the baron said. "And before they left, the Sardaukar must've accounted for at least twenty thousand."
    "What are Rabban's troop losses for the past two years?" Hawat asked.
    The Baron rubbed his jowls. "Well, he has been recruiting rather heavily, to be sure. His agents make rather extravagant promises and --" 
    "Shall we say thirty thousand in round numbers?" Hawat asked. 
    "That would seem a little high," the baron said.
    "Quite the contrary," Hawat said. "I can read between the lines of Rabban's reports as well as you can. And you certainly must've understood my reports from our agents."
    "Arrakis is a fierce planet," the Baron said. "Storm losses can --" 
    "We both know the figure for storm accretion," Hawat said.
    "What if he has lost thirty thousand?" the Baron demanded, and blood darkened his face.
    "By your own count," Hawat said, "he killed fifteen thousand over two years while losing twice that number. You say the Sardaukar accounted for another twenty thousand, possibly a few more. And I've seen the transportation manifests for their return from Arrakis. If they killed twenty thousand, they lost almost five for one. Why won't you face these figures, Baron, and understand what they mean?"
    The Baron spoke in a coldly measured cadence: "This is your job, Mentat. What do they mean?"
    "I gave you Duncan Idaho's head count on the sietch he visited," Hawat said. "It all fits. If they had just two hundred and fifty such sietch communities, their population would be about five million. My best estimate is that they had at least twice that many communities. You scatter your population on such a planet." 
    "Ten million?" The Baron's jowls quivered with amazement. 
    "At least."
    The Baron pursed his fat lips. The beady eyes stared without wavering at Hawat. Is this true Mentat computation? he wondered. How could this be and no one suspect?
    "We haven't even cut heavily into their birth-rate-growth figure," Hawat said. "We've just weeded out some of their less successful specimens, leaving the strong to grow stronger -- just like on Salusa Secundus."
    "Salusa Secundus!" the Baron barked. "What has this to do with the Emperor's prison planet?"
    "A man who survives Salusa Secundus starts out being tougher than most others," Hawat said. "When you add the very best of military training --"
    "Nonsense! By your argument, I could recruit from among the Fremen after the way they've been oppressed by my nephew." 
    Hawat spoke in a mild voice: "Don't you oppress any of your troops?" 
    "Well . . . I . . . but --"
    "Oppression is a relative thing," Hawat said. "Your fighting men are much better off than those around them, heh? They see unpleasant alternative to being soldiers of the Baron, heh?" 
    The Baron fell silent, eyes unfocused. The possibilities -- had Rabban unwittingly given House Harkonnen its ultimate weapon?
    Presently he said: "How could you be sure of the loyalty of such recruits?"
    "I would take them in small groups, not larger than platoon strength," Hawat said. "I'd remove them from their oppressive situation and isolate them with a training cadre of people who understood their background, preferably people who had preceded them from the same oppressive situation. Then I'd fill them with the mystique that their planet had really been a secret training ground to produce just such superior beings as themselves. And all the while, I'd show them what such superior beings could earn: rich living, beautiful women, fine mansions . . . whatever they desired." 
    The Baron began to nod. "The way the Sardaukar live at home." 
    "The recruits come to believe in time that such a place as Salusa Secundus is justified because it produced them -- the elite. The commonest Sardaukar trooper lives a life, in many respects, as exalted as that of any member of a Great House." 
    "Such an idea!" the Baron whispered.
    "You begin to share my suspicions," Hawat said. 
    "Where did such a thing start?" the Baron asked.
    "Ah, yes: Where did House Corrino originate? Were there people on Salusa Secundus before the Emperor sent his first contingents of prisoners there? Even the Duke Leto, a cousin on the distaff side, never knew for sure. Such questions are not encouraged."
    The Baron's eyes glazed with thought. "Yes, a very carefully kept secret. They'd use every device of --"
    "Besides, what's there to conceal?" Hawat asked. "That the Padishah Emperor has a prison planet? Everyone knows this. That he has --" 
    "Count Fenring!" the Baron blurted.
    Hawat broke off, studied the Baron with a puzzled frown. "What of Count Fenring?"
    "At my nephew's birthday several years ago," the Baron said. "This Imperial popinjay. Count Fenring, came as official observer and to . . . ah, conclude a business arrangement between the Emperor and myself." 
    "So?"
    "I . . . ah, during one of our conversations, I believe I said something about making a prison planet of Arrakis. Fenring --" 
    "What did you say exactly?" Hawat asked. 
    "Exactly? That was quite a while ago and --"
    "My Lord Baron, if you wish to make the best use of my services, you must give me adequate information. Wasn't this conversation recorded?"
    The Baron's face darkened with anger. "You're as bad as Piter! I don't like these --"
    "Piter is no longer with you my Lord," Hawat said. "As to that, whatever did happen to Piter?"
    "He became too familiar, too demanding of me," the Baron said.
    "You assure me you don't waste a useful man," Hawat said. "Will you waste me by threats and quibbling? We were discussing what you said to Count Fenring."
    Slowly, the Baron composed his features. When the time comes, he thought, I'll remember his manner with me. Yes. I will remember.
    "One moment," the Baron said, and he thought back to the meeting in his great hall. It helped to visualize the cone of silence in which they had stood. "I said something like this," the Baron said. "The Emperor knows a certain amount of killing has always been an arm of business.' I was referring to our work force losses. Then I said something about considering another solution to the Arrakeen problem and I said the Emperor's prison planet inspired me to emulate him." 
    "Witch blood!" Hawat snapped. "What did Fenring say?" 
    "That's when he began questioning me about you." 
    Hawat sat back, closed his eyes in thought. "So that's why they started looking into Arrakis," he said. "Well, the thing's done." He opened his eyes. "They must have spies all over Arrakis by now. Two years!" 
    "But certainly my innocent suggestion that --" 
    "Nothing is innocent in an Emperor's eyes! What were your instructions to Rabban?" 
    "Merely that he should teach Arrakis to fear us." 
    Hawat shook his head. "You now have two alternatives, Baron. You can kill off the natives, wipe them out entirely, or --" 
    "Waste an entire work force?"
    "Would you prefer to have the Emperor and those Great Houses he can still swing behind him come in here and perform a curettement, scrape out Giedi Prime like a hollow gourd?" 
    The Baron studied his Mentat, then: "He wouldn't dare!" 
    "Wouldn't he?" 
    The Baron's lips quivered. "What is your alternative?" 
    "Abandon your dear nephew, Rabban." 
    "Aband . . . " The Baron broke off, stared at Hawat.
    "Send him no more troops, no aid of any kind. Don't answer his messages other than to say you've heard of the terrible way he's handled things on Arrakis and you intend to take corrective measures as soon as you're able. I'll arrange to have some of your messages intercepted by Imperial spies." 
    "But what of the spice, the revenues, the --"
    "Demand your baronial profits, but be careful how you make your demands. Require fixed sums of Rabban. We can --" 
    The Baron turned his hands palms up. "But how can I be certain that my weasel nephew isn't --"
    "We still have our spies on Arrakis. Tell Rabban he either meets the spice quotas you set him or he'll be replaced." 
    "I know my nephew," the Baron said. "This would only make him oppress the population even more."
    "Of course he will!" Hawat snapped. "You don't want that stopped now! You merely want your own hands clean. Let Rabban make your Salusa Secundus for you. There's no need even to send him any prisoners. He has all the population required. If Rabban is driving his people to meet your spice quotas, then the Emperor need suspect no other motive. That's reason enough for putting the planet on the rack. And you, Baron, will not show by word or action that there's any other reason for this."
    The Baron could not keep the sly tone of admiration out of his voice. "Ah, Hawat, you are a devious one. Now, how do we move into Arrakis and make use of what Rabban prepares?" 
    "That's the simplest thing of all, Baron. If you set each year's quota a bit higher than the one before, matters will soon reach a head there. Production will drop off. You can remove Rabban and take over yourself . . . to correct the mess."
    "It fits," the Baron said. "But I can feel myself tiring of all this. I'm preparing another to take over Arrakis for me." 
    Hawat studied the fat round face across from him. Slowly the old soldier-spy began to nod his head. "Feyd-Rautha," he said. "So that's the reason for the oppression now. You're very devious yourself, Baron. Perhaps we can incorporate these two schemes. Yes. Your Feyd-Rautha can go to Arrakis as their savior. He can win the populace. Yes."
    The Baron smiled. And behind his smile, he asked himself: Now, how does this fit in with Hawat's personal scheming?
    And Hawat, seeing that he was dismissed, arose and left the red-walled room. As he walked, he could not put down the disturbing unknowns that cropped into every computation about Arrakis. This new religious leader that Gurney Halleck hinted at from his hiding place among the smugglers, this Muad'Dib.
    Perhaps I should not have told the Baron to let this religion flourish where it will, even among the folk of pan and graben, he told himself. But it's well known that repression makes a religion flourish.
    And he thought about Halleck's reports on Fremen battle tactics. The tactics smacked of Halleck himself . . . and Idaho . . . and even of Hawat.
    Did Idaho survive? he asked himself.
    But this was a futile question. He did not yet ask himself if it was possible that Paul had survived. He knew the Baron was convinced that all Atreides were dead. The Bene Gesserit witch had been his weapon, the Baron admitted. And that could only mean an end to all -- even to the woman's own son.
    What a poisonous hate she must've had for the Atreides, he thought. Something like the hate I hold for this Baron. Will my blow be as final and complete as hers?

= = = = = =

There is in all things a pattern that is part of our universe. It has symmetry, elegance, and grace -- those qualities you find always in that which the true artist captures. You can find it in the turning of the seasons, in the way sand trails along a ridge, in the branch clusters of the creosote bush or the pattern of its leaves. We try to copy these patterns in our lives and our society, seeking the rhythms, the dances, the forms that comfort. Yet, it is possible to see peril in the finding of ultimate perfection. It is clear that the ultimate pattern contains its own fixity. In such perfection, all things move toward death.
-from "The Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul-Muad'Dib remembered that there had been a meal heavy with spice essence. He clung to this memory because it was an anchor point and he could tell himself from this vantage that his immediate experience must be a dream.
    I am a theater of processes, he told himself. I am a prey to the imperfect vision, to the race consciousness and its terrible purpose.
    Yet, he could not escape the fear that he had somehow overrun himself, lost his position in time, so that past and future and present mingled without distinction. It was a kind of visual fatigue and it came, he knew, from the constant necessity of holding the prescient future as a kind of memory that was in itself a thing intrinsically of the past.
    Chani prepared the meal for me, he told himself.
    Yet Chani was deep in the south -- in the cold country where the sun was hot -- secreted in one of the new sietch strongholds, safe with their son, Leto II.
    Or, was that a thing yet to happen?
    No, he reassured himself, for Alia-the-Strange-One, his sister, had gone there with his mother and with Chani -- a twenty-thumper trip into the south, riding a Reverend Mother's palanquin fixed to the back of a wild maker.
    He shied away from thought of riding the giant worms, asking himself: Or is Alia yet to be born?
    I was on razzia, Paul recalled. We went raiding to recover the water of our dead in Arrakeen. And I found the remains of my father in the funeral pyre. I enshrined the skull of my father in a Fremen rock mound overlooking Harg Pass.
    Or was that a thing yet to be?
    My wounds are real, Paul told himself. My scars are real. The shrine of my father's skull is real.
    Still in the dreamlike state, Paul remembered that Harah, Jamis' wife, had intruded on him once to say there'd been a fight in the sietch corridor. That had been the interim sietch before the women and children had been sent into the deep south. Harah had stood there in the entrance to the inner chamber, the black wings of her hair tied back by water rings on a chain. She had held aside the chamber's hangings and told him that Chani had just killed someone.
    This happened, Paul told himself. This was real, not born out of its time and subject to change.
    Paul remembered he had rushed out to find Chani standing beneath the yellow globes of the corridor, clad in a brilliant blue wraparound robe with hood thrown back, a flush of exertion on her elfin features. She had been sheathing her crysknife. A huddled group had been hurrying away down the corridor with a burden.
    And Paul remembered telling himself: You always know when they're carrying a body.
    Chani's water rings, worn openly in sietch on a cord around her neck, tinkled as she turned toward him. 
    "Chani, what is this?" he asked.
    "I dispatched one who came to challenge you in single combat, Usul." 
    "You killed him?" 
    "Yes. But perhaps I should've left him for Harah." 
    (And Paul recalled how the faces of the people around them had showed appreciation for these words. Even Harah had laughed.) 
    "But he came to challenge me!" 
    "You trained me yourself in the weirding way, Usul." 
    "Certainly! But you shouldn't --" 
    "I was born in the desert, Usul. I know how to use a crysknife." 
    He suppressed his anger, tried to talk reasonably. "This may all be true, Chani, but --"
    "I am no longer a child hunting scorpions in the sietch by the light of a handglobe, Usul. I do not play games."
    Paul glared at her, caught by the odd ferocity beneath her casual attitude.
    "He was not worthy, Usul," Chani said. "I'd not disturb your meditations with the likes of him." She moved closer, looking at him out of the corners of her eyes, dropping her voice so that only he might hear. "And, beloved, when it's learned that a challenger may face me and be brought to shameful death by Muad'Dib's woman, there'll be fewer challengers."
    Yes, Paul told himself, that had certainly happened. It was true-past. And the number of challengers testing the new blade of Muad'Dib did drop dramatically.
    Somewhere, in a world not-of-the-dream, there was a hint of motion, the cry of a nightbird.
    I dream, Paul reassured himself. It's the spice meal.
    Still, there was about him a feeling of abandonment. He wondered it if might be possible that his ruh-spirit had slipped over somehow into the world where the Fremen believed he had his true existence -- into the alam al-mithal, the world of similitudes, that metaphysical realm where all physical limitations were removed. And he knew fear at the thought of such a place, because removal of all limitations meant removal of all points of reference. In the landscape of a myth he could not orient himself and say: "I am I because I am here."
    His mother had said once: "The people are divided, some of them, in how they think of you."
    I must be waking from the dream, Paul told himself. For this had happened -- these words from his mother, the Lady Jessica who was now a Reverend Mother of the Fremen, these words had passed through reality.
    Jessica was fearful of the religious relationship between himself and the Fremen, Paul knew. She didn't like the fact that people of both sietch and graben referred to Muad'Dib as Him. And she went questioning among the tribes, sending out her Sayyadina spies, collecting their answers and brooding on them.
    She had quoted a Bene Gesserit proverb to him: "When religion and politics travel in the same cart, the riders believe nothing can stand in their way. Their movement become headlong -- faster and faster and faster. They put aside all thought of obstacles and forget that a precipice does not show itself to the man in a blind rush until it's too late."
    Paul recalled that he had sat there in his mother's quarters, in the inner chamber shrouded by dark hangings with their surfaces covered by woven patterns out of Fremen mythology. He had sat there, hearing her out, noting the way she was always observing -- even when her eyes were lowered. Her oval face had new lines in it at the corners of the mouth, but the hair was still like polished bronze. The wide-set green eyes, though, hid beneath their over-casting of spice-imbued blue.
    "The Fremen have a simple, practical religion," he said. 
    "Nothing about religion is simple," she warned.
    But Paul, seeing the clouded future that still hung over them, found himself swayed by anger. He could only say: "Religion unifies our forces. It's our mystique."
    "You deliberately cultivate this air, this bravura," she charged. "You never cease indoctrinating." 
    "Thus you yourself taught me," he said.
    But she had been full of contentions and arguments that day. It had been the day of the circumcision ceremony for little Leto. Paul had understood some of the reasons for her upset. She had never accepted his liaison -- the "marriage of youth" -- with Chani. But Chani had produced an Atreides son, and Jessica had found herself unable to reject the child with the mother.
    Jessica had stirred finally under his stare, said: "You think me an unnatural mother." 
    "Of course not."
    "I see the way you watch me when I'm with your sister. You don't understand about your sister."
    "I know why Alia is different," he said. "She was unborn, part of you, when you changed the Water of Life. She --" 
    "You know nothing of it!"
    And Paul, suddenly unable to express the knowledge gained out of its time, said only: "I don't think you unnatural." 
    She saw his distress, said: "There is a thing, Son." 
    "Yes?" 
    "I do love your Chani. I accept her."
    This was real, Paul told himself. This wasn't the imperfect vision to be changed by the twistings out of time's own birth.
    The reassurance gave him a new hold on his world. Bits of solid reality began to dip through the dream state into his awareness. He knew suddenly that he was in a hiereg, a desert camp. Chani had planted their stilltent on flour-sand for its softness. That could only mean Chani was near by -- Chani, his soul, Chani his Sihaya, sweet as the desert spring, Chani up from the palmaries of the deep south.
    Now, he remembered her singing a sand chanty to him in the time for sleep.

"O my soul, 
Have no taste for Paradise this night, 
And I swear by Shai-hulud 
You will go there, 
Obedient to my love."

    And she had sung the walking song lovers shared on the sand, its rhythm like the drag of the dunes against the feet:

"Tell me of thine eyes 
And I will tell thee of thy heart. 
Tell me of thy feet 
And I will tell thee of thy hands. 
Tell me of thy sleeping 
And I will tell thee of thy waking. 
Tell me of thy desires
And I will tell thee of thy need."

    He had heard someone strumming a baliset in another tent. And he'd thought then of Gurney Halleck. Reminded by the familiar instrument, he had thought of Gurney whose face he had seen in a smuggler band, but who had not seen him, could not see him or know of him lest that inadvertently lead the Harkonnens to the son of the Duke they had killed.
    But the style of the player in the night, the distinctiveness of the fingers on the baliset's strings, brought the real musician back to Paul's memory. It had been Chatt the Leaper, captain of the Fedaykin, leader of the death commandos who guarded Muad'Dib.
    We are in the desert, Paul remembered. We are in the central erg beyond the Harkonnen patrols. I am here to walk the sand, to lure a maker and mount him by my own cunning that I may be a Fremen entire.
    He felt now the maula pistol at his belt, the crysknife. He felt the silence surrounding him.
    It was that special pre-morning silence when the nightbirds had gone and the day creatures had not yet signaled their alertness to their enemy, the sun.
    "You must ride the sand in the light of day that Shai-hulud shall see and know you have no fear," Stilgar had said. "Thus we turn our time around and set ourselves to sleep this night." 
    Quietly, Paul sat up, feeling the looseness of a slacked stillsuit around his body, the shadowed stilltent beyond. So softly he moved, yet Chani heard him.
    She spoke from the tent's gloom, another shadow there: "It's not yet full light, beloved." 
    "Sihaya," he said, speaking with half a laugh in his voice.
    "You call me your desert spring," she said, "but this day I'm thy goad. I am the Sayyadina who watches that the rites be obeyed." 
    He began tightening his stillsuit. "You told me once the words of the Kitab al-Ibar," he said. "You told me: 'Woman is thy field; go then to thy field and till it.' "
    "I am the mother of thy firstborn," she agreed.
    He saw her in the grayness matching him movement for movement, securing her stillsuit for the open desert. "You should get all the rest you can," she said.
    He recognized her love for him speaking then and chided her gently: "The Sayyadina of the Watch does not caution or warn the candidate."
    She slid across to his side, touched his cheek with her palm. "Today, I am both the watcher and the woman." 
    "You should've left this duty to another," he said.
    "Waiting is bad enough at best," she said. "I'd sooner be at thy side."
    He kissed her palm before securing the faceflap of his suit, then turned and cracked the seal of the tent. The air that came in to them held the chill not-quite-dryness that would precipitate trace dew in the dawn. With it came the smell of a pre-spice mass, the mass they had detected off to the northeast, and that told them there would be a maker near by.
    Paul crawled through the sphincter opening, stood on the sand and stretched the sleep from his muscles. A faint green-pearl luminescence etched the eastern horizon. The tents of his troop were small false dunes around him in the gloom. He saw movement off to the left -- the guard, and knew they had seen him.
    They knew the peril he faced this day. Each Fremen had faced it. They gave him this last few moments of isolation now that he might prepare himself.
    It must be done today, he told himself.
    He thought of the power he wielded in the face of the pogrom -- the old men who sent their sons to him to be trained in the weirding way of battle, the old men who listened to him now in council and followed his plans, the men who returned to pay him that highest Fremen compliment: "Your plan worked, Muad'Dib." 
    Yet the meanest and smallest of the Fremen warriors could do a thing that he had never done. And Paul knew his leadership suffered from the omnipresent knowledge of this difference between them. 
    He had not ridden the maker.
    Oh, he'd gone up with the others for training trips and raids, but he had not made his own voyage. Until he did, his world was bounded by the abilities of others. No true Fremen could permit this. Until he did this thing himself, even the great southlands -- the area some twenty thumpers beyond the erg -- were denied him unless he ordered a palanquin and rode like a Reverend Mother or one of the sick and wounded.
    Memory returned to him of his wrestling with his inner awareness during the night. He saw a strange parallel here -- if he mastered the maker, his rule was strengthened; if he mastered the inward eye, this carried its own measure of command. But beyond them both lay the clouded area, the Great Unrest where all the universe seemed embroiled.
    The differences in the ways he comprehended the universe haunted him -- accuracy matched with inaccuracy. He saw it in situ. Yet, when it was born, when it came into the pressures of reality, the now had its own life and grew with its own subtle differences. Terrible purpose remained. Race consciousness remained. And over all loomed the jihad, bloody and wild.
    Chani joined him outside the tent, hugging her elbows, looking up at him from the corners of her eyes the way she did when she studied his mood.
    "Tell me again about the waters of thy birthworld, Usul," she said.
    He saw that she was trying to distract him, ease his mind of tensions before the deadly test. It was growing lighter, and he noted that some of his Fedaykin were already striking their tents.
    "I'd rather you told me about the sietch and about our son," he said. "Does our Leto yet hold my mother in his palm?" 
    "It's Alia he holds as well," she said. "And he grows rapidly. He'll be a big man." 
    "What's it like in the south?" he asked.
    "When you ride the maker you'll see for yourself," she said. 
    "But I wish to see it first through your eyes." 
    "It's powerfully lonely," she said.
    He touched the nezhoni scarf at her forehead where it protruded from her stillsuit cap. "Why will you not talk about the sietch?" 
    "I have talked about it. The sietch is a lonely place without our men. It's a place of work. We labor in the factories and the potting rooms. There are weapons to be made, poles to plant that we may forecast the weather, spice to collect for the bribes. There are dunes to be planted to make them grow and to anchor them. There are fabrics and rugs to make, fuel cells to charge. There are children to train that the tribe's strength may never be lost." 
    "Is nothing then pleasant in the sietch?" he asked.
    "The children are pleasant. We observe the rites. We have sufficient food. Sometimes one of us may come north to be with her man. Life must go on."
    "My sister, Alia -- is she accepted yet by the people?" 
    Chani turned toward him in the growing dawnlight. Her eyes bored into him. "It's a thing to be discussed another time, beloved." 
    "Let us discuss it now." 
    "You should conserve your energies for the test," she said.
    He saw that he had touched something sensitive, hearing the withdrawal in her voice. "The unknown brings its own worries," he said.
    Presently she nodded, said, "There is yet . . . misunderstanding because of Alia's strangeness. The women are fearful because a child little more than an infant talks . . . of things that only an adult should know. They do not understand the . . . change in the womb that made Alia . . . different."
    "There is trouble?" he asked. And he thought: I've seen visions of trouble over Alia.
    Chani looked toward the growing line of the sunrise. "Some of the women banded to appeal to the Reverend Mother. They demanded she exorcise the demon in her daughter. They quoted the scripture: 'Suffer not a witch to live among us.' "
    "And what did my mother say to them?"
    "She recited the law and sent the women away abashed. She said: 'If Alia incites trouble, it is the fault of authority for not foreseeing and preventing the trouble.' And she tried to explain how the change had worked on Alia in the womb. But the women were angry because they had been embarrassed. They went away muttering." 
    There will be trouble because of Alia, he thought.
    A crystal blowing of sand touched the exposed portions of his face, bringing the scent of the pre-spice mass. "El Sayal, the rain of sand that brings the morning," he said.
    He looked out across the gray light of the desert landscape, the landscape beyond pity, the sand that was form absorbed in itself. Dry lightning streaked a dark corner to the south -- sign that a storm had built up its static charge there. The roll of thunder boomed long after.
    "The voice that beautifies the land," Chani said.
    More of his men were stirring out of their tents. Guards were coming in from the rims. Everything around him moved smoothly in the ancient routine that required no orders.
    "Give as few orders as possible," his father had told him . . . once . . . long ago. "Once you've given orders on a subject, you must always give orders on that subject."
    The Fremen knew this rule instinctively.
    The troop's watermaster began the morning chanty, adding to it now the call for the rite to initiate a sandrider.
    "The world is a carcass," the man chanted, his voice wailing across the dunes. "Who can turn away the Angel of Death? What Shai-hulud has decreed must be."
    Paul listened, recognizing that these were the words that also began the death chant of his Fedaykin, the words the death commandos recited as they buried themselves into battle.
    Will there be a rock shrine here this day to mark the passing of another soul? Paul asked himself. Will Fremen stop here in the future, each to add another stone and think on Muad'Dib who died in this place?
    He knew this was among the alternatives today, a fact along lines of the future radiating from this position in time-space. The imperfect vision plagued him. The more he resisted his terrible purpose and fought against the coming of the jihad, the greater the turmoil that wove through his prescience. His entire future was becoming like a river hurtling toward a chasm -- the violent nexus beyond which all was fog and clouds.
    "Stilgar approaches," Chani said. "I must stand apart now, beloved. Now, I must be Sayyadina and observe the rite that it may be reported truly in the Chronicles." She looked up at him and, for a moment, her reserve slipped, then she had herself under control. "When this is past, I shall prepare thy breakfast with my own hands," she said. She turned away.
    Stilgar moved toward him across the flour sand, stirring up little dust puddles. The dark niches of his eyes remained steady on Paul with their untamed stare. The glimpse of black beard above the stillsuit mask, the lines of craggy cheeks, could have been wind-etched from the native rock for all their movement.
    The man carried Paul's banner on its staff -- the green and black banner with a water tube in the staff -- that already was a legend in the land. Half pridefully, Paul thought: I cannot do the simplest thing without its becoming a legend. They will mark how I parted from Chani, how I greet Stilgar -- every move I make this day. Live or die, it is a legend. I must not die. Then it will be only legend and nothing to stop the jihad.
    Stilgar planted the staff in the sand beside Paul, dropped his hands to his sides. The blue-within-blue eyes remained level and intent. And Paul thought how his own eyes already were assuming this mask of color from the spice.
    "They denied us the Hajj," Stilgar said with ritual solemnity.
    As Chani had taught him, Paul responded: "Who can deny a Fremen the right to walk or ride where he wills?" 
    "I am a Naib," Stilgar said, "never to be taken alive. I am a leg of the death tripod that will destroy our foes."
    Silence settled over them.
    Paul glanced at the other Fremen scattered over the sand beyond Stilgar, the way they stood without moving for this moment of personal prayer. And he thought of how the Fremen were a people whose living consisted of killing, an entire people who had lived with rage and grief all of their days, never once considering what might take the place of either -- except for a dream with which Liet-Kynes had infused them before his death.
    "Where is the Lord who led us through the land of desert and of pits?" Stilgar asked.
    "He is ever with us," the Fremen chanted.
    Stilgar squared his shoulders, stepped closer to Paul and lowered his voice. "Now, remember what I told you. Do it simply and directly -- nothing fancy. Among our people, we ride the maker at the age of twelve. You are more than six years beyond that age and not born to this life. You don't have to impress anyone with your courage. We know you are brave. All you must do is call the maker and ride him." 
    "I will remember," Paul said.
    "See that you do. I'll not have you shame my teaching." 
    Stilgar pulled a plastic rod about a meter long from beneath his robe. The thing was pointed at one end, had a spring-wound clapper at the other end. "I prepared this thumper myself. It's a good one. Take it."
    Paul felt the warm smoothness of the plastic as he accepted the thumper.
    "Shishakli has your hooks," Stilgar said. "He'll hand them to you as you step out onto that dune over there." He pointed to his right. "Call a big maker, Usul. Show us the way." 
    Paul marked the tone of Stilgar's voice -- half ritual and half that of a worried friend.
    In that instant, the sun seemed to bound above the horizon. The sky took on the silvered gray-blue that warned this would be a day of extreme heat and dryness even for Arrakis.
    "It is the time of the scalding day," Stilgar said, and now his voice was entirely ritual. "Go, Usul, and ride the maker, travel the sand as a leader of men."
    Paul saluted his banner, noting how the green and black flag hung limply now that the dawn wind had died. He turned toward the dune Stilgar had indicated -- a dirty tan slope with an S-track crest. Already, most of the troop was moving out in the opposite direction, climbing the other dune that had sheltered their camp.
    One robed figure remained in Paul's path: Shishakli, a squad leader of the Fedaykin, only his slope-lidded eyes visible between stillsuit cap and mask.
    Shishakli presented two thin, whiplike shafts as Paul approached. The shafts were about a meter and a half long with glistening plasteel hoods at one end, roughened at the other end for a firm grip.
    Paul accepted them both in his left hand as required by the ritual.
    "They are my own hooks," Shishakli said in a husky voice. "They never have failed."
    Paul nodded, maintaining the necessary silence, moved past the man and up the dune slope. At the crest, he glanced back, saw the troop scattering like a flight of insects, their robes fluttering. He stood alone now on the sandy ridge with only the horizon in front of him, the flat and unmoving horizon. This was a good dune Stilgar had chosen, higher than its companions for the viewpoint vantage.
    Stooping, Paul planted the thumper deep into the windward face where the sand was compacted and would give maximum transmission to the drumming. Then he hesitated, reviewing the lessons, reviewing the life-and-death necessities that faced him.
    When he threw the latch, the thumper would begin its summons. Across the sand, a giant worm -- a maker -- would hear and come to the drumming. With the whiplike hook-staffs, Paul knew, he could mount the maker's high curving back. For as long as a forward edge of a worm's ring segment was held open by a hook, open to admit abrasive sand into the more sensitive interior, the creature would not retreat beneath the desert. It would, in fact, roll its gigantic body to bring the opened segment as far away from the desert surface as possible.
    I am a sandrider, Paul told himself.
    He glanced down at the hooks in his left hand, thinking that he had only to shift those hooks down the curve of a maker's immense side to make the creature roll and turn, guiding it where he willed. He had seen it done. He had been helped up the side of a worm for a short ride in training. The captive worm could be ridden until it lay exhausted and quiescent upon the desert surface and a new maker must be summoned.
    Once he was past this test, Paul knew, he was qualified to make the twenty-thumper journey into the southland -- to rest and restore himself -- into the south where the women and the families had been hidden from the pogrom among the new palmaries and sietch warrens.
    He lifted his head and looked to the south, reminding himself that the maker summoned wild from the erg was an unknown quantity, and the one who summoned it was equally unknown to this test.
    "You must gauge the approaching maker carefully," Stilgar had explained. "You must stand close enough that you can mount it as it passes, yet not so close that it engulfs you."
    With abrupt decision, Paul released the thumper's latch. The clapper began revolving and the summons drummed through the sand, a measured "lump . . . lump . . . lump . . . " 
    He straightened, scanning the horizon, remembering Stilgar's words: "Judge the line of approach carefully. Remember, a worm seldom makes an unseen approach to a thumper. Listen all the same. You may often hear it before you see it."
    And Chani's words of caution, whispered at night when her fear for him overcame her, filled his mind: "When you take your stand along the maker's path, you must remain utterly still. You must think like a patch of sand. Hide beneath your cloak and become a little dune in your very essence."
    Slowly, he scanned the horizon, listening, watching for the signs he had been taught.
    It came from the southeast, a distant hissing, a sand-whisper. Presently he saw the faraway outline of the creature's track against the dawnlight and realized he had never before seen a maker this large, never heard of one this size. It appeared to be more than half a league long, and the rise of the sandwave at its cresting head was like the approach of a mountain.
    This is nothing I have seen by vision or in life, Paul cautioned himself. He hurried across the path of the thing to take his stand, caught up entirely by the rushing needs of this moment.

= = = = = = 

"Control the coinage and the courts -- let the rabble have the rest." Thus the Padishah Emperor advises you. And he tells you: "If you want profits, you must rule." There is truth in these words, but I ask myself: "Who are the rabble and who are the ruled?"
-Muad'Dib's Secret Message to the Landsraad from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    A thought came unbidden to Jessica's mind: Paul will be undergoing his sandrider test at any moment now. They try to conceal this fact from me, but it's obvious. 
    And Chani has gone on some mysterious errand.
    Jessica sat in her resting chamber, catching a moment of quiet between the night's classes. It was a pleasant chamber, but not as large as the one she had enjoyed in Sietch Tabr before their flight from the pogrom. Still, this place had thick rugs on the floor, soft cushions, a low coffee table near at hand, multicolored hangings on the walls, and soft yellow glowglobes overhead. The room was permeated with the distinctive acrid furry odor of a Fremen sietch that she had come to associate with a sense of security.
    Yet she knew she would never overcome a feeling of being in an alien place. It was the harshness that the rugs and hangings attempted to conceal.
    A faint tinkling-drumming-slapping penetrated to the resting chamber. Jessica knew it for a birth celebration, probably Subiay's. Her time was near. And Jessica knew she'd see the baby soon enough -- a blue-eyed cherub brought to the Reverend Mother for blessing. She knew also that her daughter, Alia, would be at the celebration and would report on it.
    It was not yet time for the nightly prayer of parting. They wouldn't have started a birth celebration near the time of ceremony that mourned the slave raids of Poritrin, Bela Tegeuse, Rossak, and Harmonthep.
    Jessica sighed. She knew she was trying to keep her thoughts off her son and the dangers he faced -- the pit traps with their poisoned barbs, the Harkonnen raids (although these were growing fewer as the Fremen took their toll of aircraft and raiders with the new weapons Paul had given them), and the natural dangers of the desert -- makers and thirst and dust chasms.
    She thought of calling for coffee and with the thought came that ever-present awareness of paradox in the Fremen way of life: how well they lived in these sietch caverns compared to the graben pyons; yet, how much more they endured in the open hajr of the desert than anything the Harkonnen bondsmen endured.
    A dark hand inserted itself through the hangings beside her, deposited a cup upon the table and withdrew. From the cup arose the aroma of spiced coffee.
    An offering from the birth celebration, Jessica thought.
    She took the coffee and sipped it, smiling at herself. In what other society of our universe, she asked herself, could a person of my station accept an anonymous drink and quaff that drink without fear? I could alter any poison now before it did me harm, or course, but the donor doesn't realize this.
    She drained the cup, feeling the energy and lift of its contents -- hot and delicious.
    And she wondered what other society would have such a natural regard for her privacy and comfort that the giver would intrude only enough to deposit the gift and not inflict her with the donor? Respect and love had sent the gift -- with only a slight tinge of fear.
    Another element of the incident forced itself into her awareness: she had thought of coffee and it had appeared. There was nothing of telepathy here, she knew. It was the tau, the oneness of the sietch community, a compensation from the subtle poison of the spice diet they shared. The great mass of the people could never hope to attain the enlightenment the spice seed brought to her; they had not been trained and prepared for it. Their minds rejected what they could not understand or encompass. Still they felt and reacted sometimes like a single organism.
    And the thought of coincidence never entered their minds.
    Has Paul passed his test on the sand? Jessica asked herself. He's capable, but accident can strike down even the most capable. 
    The waiting.
    It's the dreariness, she thought. You can wait just so long. Then the dreariness of the waiting overcomes you. 
    There was all manner of waiting in their lives.
    More than two years we've been here, she thought, and twice that number at least to go before we can even hope to think of trying to wrest Arrakis from the Harkonnen governor, the Mudir Nahya, the Beast Rabban.
    "Reverend Mother?"
    The voice from outside the hangings at her door was that of Harah, the other woman in Paul's menage. 
    "Yes, Harah."
    The hangings parted and Harah seemed to glide through them. She wore sietch sandals, a red-yellow wraparound that exposed her arms almost to the shoulders. Her black hair was parted in the middle and swept back like the wings of an insect, flat and oily against her head. The jutting, predatory features were drawn into an intense frown.
    Behind Harah came Alia, a girl-child of about two years.
    Seeing her daughter, Jessica was caught as she frequently was by Alia's resemblance to Paul at that age -- the same wide-eyed solemnity to her questing look, the dark hair and firmness of mouth. But there were subtle differences, too, and it was in these that most adults found Alia disquieting. The child -- little more than a toddler -- carried herself with a calmness and awareness beyond her years. Adults were shocked to find her laughing at a subtle play of words between the sexes. Or they'd catch themselves listening to her half-lisping voice, still blurred as it was by an unformed soft palate, and discover in her words sly remarks that could only be based on experiences no two-year-old had ever encountered.
    Harah sank to a cushion with an exasperated sigh, frowned at the child.
    "Alia." Jessica motioned to her daughter.
    The child crossed to a cushion beside her mother, sank to it and clasped her mother's hand. The contact of flesh restored that mutual awareness they had shared since before Alia's birth. It wasn't a matter of shared thoughts -- although there were bursts of that if they touched while Jessica was changing the spice poison for a ceremony. It was something larger, an immediate awareness of another living spark, a sharp and poignant thing, a nerve-sympatico that made them emotionally one.
    In the formal manner that befitted a member of her son's household, Jessica said: "Subakh ul kuhar, Harah. This night finds you well?"
    With the same traditional formality, she said: "Subakh un nar. I am well." The words were almost toneless. Again, she sighed. 
    Jessica sensed amusement from Alia.
    "My brother's ghanima is annoyed with me," Alia said in her half-lisp.
    Jessica marked the term Alia used to refer to Harah -- ghanima. In the subtleties of the Fremen tongue, the word meant "something acquired in battle" and with the added overtone that the something no longer was used for its original purpose. An ornament, a spearhead used as a curtain weight.
    Harah scowled at the child. "Don't try to insult me, child. I know my place." 
    "What have you done this time, Alia?" Jessica asked.
    Harah answered; "Not only has she refused to play with the other children today, but she intruded where . . . "
    "I hid behind the hangings and watched Subiay's child being born," Alia said. "It's a boy. He cried and cried. What a set of lungs! When he'd cried long enough --"
    "She came out and touched him," Harah said, "and he stopped crying. Everyone knows a Fremen baby must get his crying done at birth, if he's in sietch because he can never cry again lest he betray us on hajr."
    "He'd cried enough," Alia said. "I just wanted to feel his spark, his life. That's all. And when he felt me he didn't want to cry anymore." 
    "It's just made more talk among the people," Harah said.
    "Subiay's boy is healthy?" Jessica asked. She saw that something was troubling Harah deeply and wondered at it.
    "Healthy as any mother could ask," Harah said. "They know Alia didn't hurt him. They didn't so much mind her touching him. He settled down right away and was happy. It was . . . " Harah shrugged.
    "It's the strangeness of my daughter, is that it?" Jessica asked. "It's the way she speaks of things beyond her years and of things no child her age could know -- things of the past."
    "How could she know what a child looked like on Bela Tegeuse?" Harah demanded.
    "But he does!" Alia said, "Subiay's boy looks just like the son of Mitha born before the parting." 
    "Alia!" Jessica said. "I warned you." 
    "But, Mother, I saw it and it was true and . . . " 
    Jessica shook her head, seeing the signs of disturbance in Harah's face. What have I borne? Jessica asked herself. A daughter who knew at birth everything that I knew . . . and more: everything revealed to her out of the corridors of the past by the Reverend Mothers within me.
    "It's not just the things she says," Harah said. "It's the exercises, too: the way she sits and stares at a rock, moving only one muscle beside her nose, or a muscle on the back of a finger, or --" 
    "Those are the Bene Gesserit training," Jessica said. "You know that, Harah. Would you deny my daughter her inheritance?" 
    "Reverend Mother, you know these things don't matter to me," Harah said. "It's the people and the way they mutter. I feel danger in it. They say your daughter's a demon, that other children refuse to play with her, that she's --"
    "She has so little in common with the other children," Jessica said. "She's no demon. It's just the --" 
    "Of course she's not!"
    Jessica found herself surprised at the vehemence in Harah's tone, glanced down at Alia. The child appeared lost in thought, radiating a sense of . . . waiting. Jessica returned her attention to Harah.
    "I respect the fact that you're a member of my son's household," Jessica said. (Alia stirred against her hand.) "You may speak openly with me of whatever's troubling you."
    "I will not be a member of your son's household much longer," Harah said. "I've waited this long for the sake of my sons, the special training they receive as the children of Usul. It's little enough I could give them since it's known I don't share your son's bed." 
    Again Alia stirred beside her, half-sleeping, warm.
    "You'd have made a good companion for my son, though," Jessica said. And she added to herself because such thoughts were ever with her: Companion . . . not a wife. Jessica's thoughts went then straight to the center, to the pang that came from the common talk in the sietch that her son's companionship with Chani had become a permanent thing, the marriage.
    I love Chani, Jessica thought, but she reminded herself that love might have to step aside for royal necessity. Royal marriages had other reasons than love.
    "You think I don't know what you plan for your son?" Harah asked.
    "What do you mean?" Jessica demanded. 
    "You plan to unite the tribes under Him," Harah said. 
    "Is that bad?" 
    "I see danger for him . . . and Alia is part of that danger." 
    Alia nestled closer to her mother, eyes opened now and studying Harah.
    "I've watched you two together," Harah said, "the way you touch. And Alia is like my own flesh because she's sister to one who is like my brother. I've watched over her and guarded her from the time she was a mere baby, from the time of the razzia when we fled here. I've seen many things about her." 
    Jessica nodded, feeling disquiet begin to grow in Alia beside her.
    "You know what I mean," Harah said. "The way she knew from the first what we were saying to her. When has there been another baby who knew the water discipline so young? What other baby's first words to her nurse were: 'I love you, Harah'?"
    Harah stared at Alia. "Why do you think I accept her insults? I know there's no malice in them." 
    Alia looked up at her mother.
    "Yes, I have reasoning powers, Reverend Mother," Harah said. "I could have been of the Sayyadina. I have seen what I have seen."
    "Harah . . . " Jessica shrugged. "I don't know what to say." And she felt surprise at herself, because this literally was true.
    Alia straightened, squared her shoulders. Jessica felt the sense of waiting ended, an emotion compounded of decision and sadness. 
    "We made a mistake," Alia said. "Now we need Harah." 
    "It was the ceremony of the seed," Harah said, "when you changed the Water of Life, Reverend Mother, when Alia was yet unborn within you." 
    Need Harah? Jessica asked herself.
    "Who else can talk among the people and make them begin to understand me?" Alia asked.
    "What would you have her do?" Jessica asked. 
    "She already knows what to do," Alia said.
    "I will tell them the truth," Harah said. Her face seemed suddenly old and sad with its olive skin drawn into frown wrinkles, a witchery in the sharp features. "I will tell them that Alia only pretends to be a little girl, that she has never been a little girl." 
    Alia shook her head. Tears ran down her cheeks, and Jessica felt the wave of sadness from her daughter as though the emotion were her own.
    "I know I'm a freak," Alia whispered. The adult summation coming from the child mouth was like a bitter confirmation.
    "You're not a freak!" Harah snapped. "Who dared say you're a freak?"
    Again, Jessica marveled at the fierce note of protectiveness in Harah's voice. Jessica saw then that Alia had judged correctly -- they did need Harah. The tribe would understand Harah -- both her words and her emotions -- for it was obvious she loved Alia as though this were her own child. 
    "Who said it?" Harah repeated. 
    "Nobody."
    Alia used a corner of Jessica's aba to wipe the tears from her face. She smoothed the robe where she had dampened and crumpled it.
    "Then don't you say it," Harah ordered. 
    "Yes, Harah."
    "Now," Harah said, "you may tell me what it was like so that I may tell the others. Tell me what it is that happened to you." 
    Alia swallowed, looked up at her mother. 
    Jessica nodded.
    "One day I woke up," Alia said. "It was like waking from sleep except that I could not remember going to sleep. I was in a warm, dark place. And I was frightened."
    Listening to the half-lisping voice of her daughter, Jessica remembered that day in the big cavern.
    "When I was frightened," Alia said, "I tried to escape, but there was no way to escape. Then I saw a spark . . . but it wasn't exactly like seeing it. The spark was just there with me and I felt the spark's emotions . . . soothing me, comforting me, telling me that way that everything would be all right. That was my mother."
    Harah rubbed at her eyes, smiled reassuringly at Alia. Yet there was a look of wildness in the eyes of the Fremen woman, an intensity as though they, too, were trying to hear Alia's words.
    And Jessica thought: What do we really know of how such a one thinks . . . out of her unique experiences and training and ancestry?
    "Just when I felt safe and reassured," Alia said, "there, was another spark with us . . . and everything was happening at once. The other spark was the old Reverend Mother. She was . . . trading lives with my mother . . . everything . . . and I was there with them, seeing it all . . . everything. And it was over, and I was them and all the others and myself . . . only it took me a long time to find myself again. There were so many others."
    "It was a cruel thing," Jessica said. "No being should wake into consciousness thus. The wonder of it is you could accept all that happened to you."
    "I couldn't do anything else!" Alia said. "I didn't know how to reject or hide my consciousness . . . or shut if off . . . everything just happened . . . everything . . . "
    "We didn't know," Harah murmured. "When we gave your mother the Water to change, we didn't know you existed within her."
    "Don't be sad about it, Harah," Alia said. "I shouldn't feel sorry for myself. After all, there's cause for happiness here: I'm a Reverend Mother. The tribe has two Rev . . . " 
    She broke off, tipping her head to listen.
    Harah rocked back on her heels against the sitting cushion, stared at Alia, bringing her attention then up to Jessica's face. 
    "Didn't you suspect?" Jessica asked. 
    "Sh-h-h-h," Alia said.
    A distant rhythmic chanting came to them through the hangings that separated them from the sietch corridors. It grew louder, carrying distinct sounds now: "Ya! Ya! Yawm! Ya! Ya! Yawm! Mu zein, wallah! Ya! Ya! Yawm! Mu zein, Wallah!" 
    The chanters passed the outer entrance, and their voices boomed through to the inner apartments. Slowly the sound receded.
    When the sound had dimmed sufficiently, Jessica began the ritual, the sadness in her voice: "It was Ramadhan and April on Bela Tegeuse."
    "My family sat in their pool courtyard," Harah said, "in air bathed by the moisture that arose from the spray of a fountain. There was a tree of portyguls, round and deep in color, near at hand. There was a basket with mish mish and baklawa and mugs of liban -- all manner of good things to eat. In our gardens and, in our flocks, there was peace . . . peace in all the land." 
    "Life was full with happiness until the raiders came," Alia said.
    "Blood ran cold at the scream of friends," Jessica said. And she felt the memories rushing through her out of all those other pasts she shared.
    "La, la, la, the women cried," said Harah.
    "The raiders came through the mushtamal, rushing at us with their knives dripping red from the lives of our men," Jessica said.
    Silence came over the three of them as it was in all the apartments of the sietch, the silence while they remembered and kept their grief thus fresh.
    Presently, Harah uttered the ritual ending to the ceremony, giving the words a harshness that Jessica had never before heard in them.
    "We will never forgive and we will never forget," Harah said.
    In the thoughtful quiet that followed her words, they heard a muttering of people, the swish of many robes. Jessica sensed someone standing beyond the hangings that shielded her chamber. 
    "Reverend Mother?"
    A woman's voice, and Jessica recognized it: the voice of Tharthar, one of Stilgar's wives. 
    "What is it, Tharthar?" 
    "There is trouble, Reverend Mother."
    Jessica felt a constriction at her heart, an abrupt fear for Paul. "Paul . . ." she gasped.
    Tharthar spread the hangings, stepped into the chamber. Jessica glimpsed a press of people in the outer room before the hangings fell. She looked up at Tharthar -- a small, dark woman in a red-figured robe of black, the total blue of her eyes trained fixedly on Jessica, the nostrils of her tiny nose dilated to reveal the plug scars. 
    "What is it?" Jessica demanded.
    "There is word from the sand," Tharthar said. "Usul meets the maker for his test . . . it is today. The young men say he cannot fail, he will be a sandrider by nightfall. The young men are banding for a razzia. They will raid in the north and meet Usul there. They say they will raise the cry then. They say they will force him to call out Stilgar and assume command of the tribes."
    Gathering water, planting the dunes, changing their world slowly but surely -- these are no longer enough, Jessica thought. The little raids, the certain raids -- these are no longer enough now that Paul and I have trained them. They feel their power. They want to fight.
    Tharthar shifted from one foot to the other, cleared her throat.
    We know the need for cautious waiting, Jessica thought, but there's the core of our frustration. We know also the harm that waiting extended too long can do us. We lose our senses of purpose if the waiting's prolonged.
    "The young men say if Usul does not call out Stilgar, then he must be afraid," Tharthar said. 
    She lowered her gaze. 
    "So that's the way of it," Jessica muttered. And she thought: Well I saw it coming. As did Stilgar.
    Again, Tharthar cleared her throat. "Even my brother, Shoab, says it," she said. "They will leave Usul no choice." 
    Then it has come, Jessica thought. And Paul will have to handle it himself. The Reverend Mother dare not become involved in the succession.
    Alia freed her hand from her mother's, said: "I will go with Tharthar and listen to the young men. Perhaps there is a way." 
    Jessica met Tharthar's gaze, but spoke to Alia: "Go, then. And report to me as soon as you can."
    "We do not want this thing to happen, Reverend Mother," Tharthar said.
    "We do not want it," Jessica agreed. "The tribe needs all its strength." She glanced at Harah. "Will you go with them?" 
    Harah answered the unspoken part of the question: "Tharthar will allow no harm to befall Alia. She knows we will soon be wives together, she and I, to share the same man. We have talked, Tharthar and I." Harah looked up at Tharthar, back to Jessica. "We have an understanding."
    Tharthar held out a hand for Alia, said: "We must hurry. The young men are leaving."
    They pressed through the hangings, the child's hand in the small woman's hand, but the child seemed to be leading.
    "If Paul-Muad'Dib slays Stilgar, this will not serve the tribe," Harah said. "Always before, it has been the way of succession, but times have changed." 
    "Times have changed for you, as well," Jessica said.
    "You cannot think I doubt the outcome of such a battle," Harah said. "Usul could not but win." 
    "That was my meaning," Jessica said.
    "And you think my personal feelings enter into my judgment," Harah said. She shook her head, her water rings tinkling at her neck. "How wrong you are. Perhaps you think, as well, that I regret not being the chosen of Usul, that I am jealous of Chani?" 
    "You make your own choice as you are able," Jessica said.
    "I pity Chani," Harah said.
    Jessica stiffened. "What do you mean?"
    "I know what you think of Chani," Harah said. "You think she is not the wife for your son."
    Jessica settled back, relaxed on her cushions. She shrugged. "Perhaps."
    "You could be right," Harah said. "If you are, you may find a surprising ally -- Chani herself. She wants whatever is best for Him."
    Jessica swallowed past a sudden tightening in her throat. "Chani's very dear to me," she said. "She could be no --"
    "Your rugs are very dirty in here," Harah said. She swept her gaze around the floor, avoiding Jessica's eyes. "So many people tramping through here all the time. You really should have them cleaned more often."

= = = = = =

You cannot avoid the interplay of politics within an orthodox religion. This power struggle permeates the training, educating and disciplining of the orthodox community. Because of this pressure, the leaders of such a community inevitably must face that ultimate internal question: to succumb to complete opportunism as the price of maintaining their rule, or risk sacrificing themselves for the sake of the orthodox ethic.
-from "Muad'Dib: The Religious Issues" by the Princess Irulan

    Paul waited on the sand outside the gigantic maker's line of approach. I must not wait like a smuggler -- impatient and jittering, he reminded himself. I must be part of the desert.
    The thing was only minutes away now, filling the morning with the friction-hissing of its passage. Its great teeth within the cavern-circle of its mouth spread like some enormous flower. The spice odor from it dominated the air.
    Paul's stillsuit rode easily on his body and he was only distantly aware of his nose plugs, the breathing mask. Stilgar's teaching, the painstaking hours on the sand, overshadowed all else.
    "How far outside the maker's radius must you stand in pea sand?" Stilgar had asked him.
    And he had answered correctly: "Half a meter for every meter of the maker's diameter." 
    "Why?"
    "To avoid the vortex of its passage and still have time to run in and mount it."
    "You've ridden the little ones bred for the seed and the Water of Life," Stilgar had said. "But what you'll summon for your test is a wild maker, an old man of the desert. You must have proper respect for such a one."
    Now the thumper's deep drumming blended with the hiss of the approaching worm. Paul breathed deeply, smelling mineral bitterness of sand even through his filters. The wild maker, the old man of the desert, loomed, almost on him. Its cresting front segments threw a sandwave that would sweep across his knees.
    Come up, you lovely monster, he thought. Up. You hear me calling. Come up. Come up.
    The wave lifted his feet. Surface dust swept across him. He steadied himself, his world dominated by the passage of that sand-clouded curving wall, that segmented cliff, the ring lines sharply defined in it.
    Paul lifted his hooks, sighted along them, leaned in. He felt them bite and pull. He leaped upward, planting his feet against that wall, leaning out against the clinging barbs. This was the true instant of the testing: if he had planted the hooks correctly at the leading edge of a ring segment, opening the segment, the worm would not roll down and crush him.
    The worm slowed. It glided across the thumper, silencing it. Slowly, it began to roll -- up, up -- bringing those irritant barbs as high as possible, away from the sand that threatened the soft inner lapping of its ring segment.
    Paul found himself riding upright atop the worm. He felt exultant, like an emperor surveying his world. He suppressed a sudden urge to cavort there, to turn the worm, to show off his mastery of this creature.
    Suddenly he understood why Stilgar had warned him once about brash young men who danced and played with these monsters, doing handstands on their backs, removing both hooks and replanting them before the worm could spill them.
    Leaving one hook in place, Paul released the other and planted it lower down the side. When the second hook was firm and tested, he brought down the first one, thus worked his way down the side. The maker rolled, and as it rolled, it turned, coming around the sweep of flour sand where the others waited.
    Paul saw them come up, using their hooks to climb, but avoiding the sensitive ring edges until they were on top. They rode at last in a triple line behind him, steadied against their hooks.
    Stilgar moved up through the ranks, checked the positioning of Paul's hooks, glanced up at Paul's smiling face.
    "You did it, eh?" Stilgar asked, raising his voice above the hiss of their passage. "That's what you think? You did it?" He straightened. "Now I tell you that was a very sloppy job. We have twelve-year-olds who do better. There was drumsand to your left where you waited. You could not retreat there if the worm turned that way." 
    The smile slipped from Paul's face. "I saw the drumsand." 
    "Then why did you not signal for one of us to take up position secondary to you? It was a thing you could do even in the test." 
    Paul swallowed, faced into the wind of their passage.
    "You think it bad of me to say this now," Stilgar said. "It is my duty. I think of your worth to the troop. If you had stumbled into that drumsand, the maker would've turned toward you." 
    In spite of a surge of anger, Paul knew that Stilgar spoke the truth. It took a long minute and the full effort of the training he had received from his mother for Paul to recapture a feeling of calm. "I apologize," he said. "It will not happen again." 
    "In a tight position, always leave yourself a secondary, someone to take the maker if you cannot," Stilgar said. "Remember that we work together. That way, we're certain. We work together, eh?" 
    He slapped Paul's shoulder. 
    "We work together," Paul agreed.
    "Now," Stilgar said, and his voice was harsh, "show me you know how to handle a maker. Which side are we on?" 
    Paul glanced down at the scaled ring surface on which they stood, noted the character and size of the scales, the way they grew larger off to his right, smaller to his left. Every worm, he knew, moved characteristically with one side up more frequently. As it grew older, the characteristic up-side became an almost constant thing. Bottom scales grew larger, heavier, smoother. Top scales could be told by size alone on a big worm.
    Shifting his hooks, Paul moved to the left. He motioned flankers down to open segments along the side and keep the worm on a straight course as it rolled. When he had it turned, he motioned two steersmen out of the line and into positions ahead.
    "Ach, haiiiii-yoh!" he shouted in the traditional call. The left-side steersman opened a ring segment there.
    In a majestic circle, the maker turned to protect its opened segment. Full around it came and when it was headed back to the south, Paul shouted: "Geyrat!"
    The steersman released his hook. The maker lined out in a straight course.
    Stilgar said. "Very good, Paul Muad'Dib. With plenty of practice, you may yet become a sandrider." 
    Paul frowned, thinking: Was I not first up?
    From behind him there came sudden laughter. The troop began chanting, flinging his name against the sky. 
    "Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib!" 
    And far to the rear along the worm's surface, Paul heard the beat of the goaders pounding the tail segments. The worm began picking up speed. Their robes flapped in the wind. The abrasive sound of their passage increased.
    Paul looked back through the troop, found Chani's face among them. He looked at her as he spoke to Stilgar. "Then I am a sandrider, Stil?" 
    "Hal yawm! You are a sandrider this day." 
    "Then I may choose our destination?" 
    "That's the way of it."
    "And I am a Fremen born this day here in the Habbanya erg. I have had no life before this day. I was as a child until this day." 
    "Not quite a child," Stilgar said. He fastened a corner of his hood where the wind was whipping it.
    "But there was a cork sealing off my world, and that cork has been pulled." 
    "There is no cork."
    "I would go south, Stilgar -- twenty thumpers. I would see this land we make, this land that I've only seen through the eyes of others."
    And I would see my son and my family, he thought. I need time now to consider the future that is a past within my mind. The turmoil comes and if I'm not where I can unravel it, the thing will run wild.
    Stilgar looked at him with a steady, measuring gaze. Paul kept his attention on Chani, seeing the interest quicken in her face, noting also the excitement his words had kindled in the troop.
    "The men are eager to raid with you in the Harkonnen sinks," Stilgar said. "The sinks are only a thumper away." 
    "The Fedaykin have raided with me," Paul said. "They'll raid with me again until no Harkonnen breathes Arrakeen air." 
    Stilgar studied him as they rode, and Paul realized the man was seeing this moment through the memory of how he had risen to command of the Tabr sietch and to leadership of the Council of Leaders now that Liet-Kynes was dead.
    He has heard the reports of unrest among the young Fremen, Paul thought.
    "Do you wish a gathering of the leaders?" Stilgar asked.
    Eyes blazed among the young men of the troop. They swayed as they rode, and they watched. And Paul saw the look of unrest in Chani's glance, the way she looked from Stilgar, who was her uncle, to Paul-Muad'Dib, who was her mate. 
    "You cannot guess what I want," Paul said.
    And he thought: I cannot back down. I must hold control over these people.
    "You are mudir of the sandride this day," Stilgar said. Cold formality rang in his voice: "How do you use this power?" 
    We need time to relax, time for cool reflection, Paul thought. 
    "We shall go south," Paul said.
    "Even if I say we shall turn back to the north when this day is over?" 
    "We shall go south," Paul repeated.
    A sense of inevitable dignity enfolded Stilgar as he pulled his robe tightly around him. "There will be a Gathering," he said. "I will send the messages."
    He thinks I will call him out, Paul thought. And he knows he cannot stand against me.
    Paul faced south, feeling the wind against his exposed cheeks, thinking of the necessities that went into his decisions. 
    They do not know how it is, he thought.
    But he knew he could not let any consideration deflect him. He had to remain on the central line of the time storm he could see in the future. There would come an instant when it could be unraveled, but only if he were where he could cut the central knot of it.
    I will not call him out if it can be helped, he thought. If there's another way to prevent the jihad . . . 
    "We'll camp for the evening meal and prayer at Cave of Birds beneath Habbanya Ridge," Stilgar said. He steadied himself with one hook against the swaying of the maker, gestured ahead at a low rock barrier rising out of the desert.
    Paul studied the cliff, the great streaks of rock crossing it like waves. No green, no blossom softened that rigid horizon. Beyond it stretched the way to the southern desert -- a course of at least ten days and nights, as fast as they could goad the makers. 
    Twenty thumpers.
    The way led far beyond the Harkonnen patrols. He knew how it would be. The dreams had shown him. One day, as they went, there 'd be a faint change of color on the far horizon -- such a slight change that he might feel he was imagining it out of his hopes -- and there would be the new sietch.
    "Does my decision suit Muad'Dib?" Stilgar asked. Only the faintest touch of sarcasm tinged his voice, but Fremen ears around them, alert to every tone in a bird's cry or a cielago's piping message, heard the sarcasm and watched Paul to see what he would do.
    "Stilgar heard me swear my loyalty to him when we consecrated the Fedaykin," Paul said. "My death commandos know I spoke with honor. Does Stilgar doubt it?"
    Real pain exposed itself in Paul's voice. Stilgar heard it and lowered his gaze.
    "Usul, the companion of my sietch, him I would never doubt," Stilgar said. "But you are Paul-Muad'Dib, the Atreides Duke, and you are the Lisan al-Gaib, the Voice from the Outer World. These men I don't even know."
    Paul turned away to watch the Habbanya Ridge climb out of the desert. The maker beneath them still felt strong and willing. It could carry them almost twice the distance of any other in Fremen experience. He knew it. There was nothing outside the stories told to children that could match this old man of the desert. It was the stuff of a new legend, Paul realized. 
    A hand gripped his shoulder.
    Paul looked at it, followed the arm to the face beyond it -- the dark eyes of Stilgar exposed between filter mask and stillsuit hood.
    "The one who led Tabr sietch before me," Stilgar said, "he was my friend. We shared dangers. He owed me his life many a time . . . and I owed him mine." 
    "I am your friend, Stilgar," Paul said.
    "No man doubts it," Stilgar said. He removed his hand, shrugged. "It's the way."
    Paul saw that Stilgar was too immersed in the Fremen way to consider the possibility of any other. Here a leader took the reins from the dead hands of his predecessor, or slew among the strongest of his tribe if a leader died in the desert. Stilgar had risen to be a naib in that way.
    "We should leave this maker in deep sand," Paul said. 
    "Yes," Stilgar agreed. "We could walk to the cave from here." 
    "We've ridden him far enough that he'll bury himself and sulk for a day or so," Paul said.
    "You're the mudir of the sandride," Stilgar said. "Say when we . . ." He broke off, stared at the eastern sky.
    Paul whirled. The spice-blue overcast on his eyes made the sky appear dark, a richly filtered azure against which a distant rhythmic flashing stood out in sharp contrast. 
    Ornithopter!
    "One small 'thopter," Stilgar said.
    "Could be a scout," Paul said. "Do you think they've seen us." 
    "At this distance we're just a worm on the surface," Stilgar said. He motioned with his left hand. "Off. Scatter on the sand." 
    The troop began working down the worm's sides, dropping off, blending with the sand beneath their cloaks. Paul marked where Chani dropped. Presently, only he and Stilgar remained.
    "First up, last off," Paul said.
    Stilgar nodded, dropped down the side on his hooks, leaped onto the sand. Paul waited until the maker was safely clear of the scatter area, then released his hooks. This was the tricky moment with a worm not completely exhausted.
    Freed of its goads and hooks, the big worm began burrowing into the sand. Paul ran lightly back along its broad surface, judged his moment carefully and leaped off. He landed running, lunged against the slipface of a dune the way he had been taught, and hid himself beneath the cascade of sand over his robe. 
    Now, the waiting . . . 
    Paul turned, gently, exposed a crack of sky beneath a crease in his robe. He imagined the others back along their path doing the same.
    He heard the beat of the 'thopter's wings before he saw it. There was a whisper of jetpods and it came over his patch of desert, turned in a broad arc toward the ridge. 
    An unmarked 'thopter, Paul noted. 
    It flew out of sight beyond Habbanya Ridge. 
    A bird cry sounded over the desert. Another.
    Paul shook himself free of sand, climbed to the dune top. Other figures stood out in a line trailing away from the ridge. He recognized Chani and Stilgar among them. 
    Stilgar signaled toward the ridge.
    They gathered and began the sandwalk, gliding over the surface in a broken rhythm that would disturb no maker. Stilgar paced himself beside Paul along the windpacked crest of a dune. 
    "It was a smuggler craft," Stilgar said.
    "So it seemed," Paul said. "But this is deep into the desert, for smugglers." 
    "They've their difficulties with patrols, too," Stilgar said. 
    "If they come this deep, they may go deeper," Paul said. 
    "True."
    "It wouldn't be well for them to see what they could see if they ventured too deep into the south. Smugglers sell information, too." 
    "They were hunting spice, don't you think?" Stilgar asked.
    "There will be a wing and a crawler waiting somewhere for that one," Paul said. "We've spice. Let's bait a patch of sand and catch us some smugglers. They should be taught that this is our land and our men need practice with the new weapons." 
    "Now, Usul speaks," Stilgar said. "Usul thinks Fremen." 
    But Usul must give way to decisions that match a terrible purpose, Paul thought.
    And the storm was gathering.

= = = = = =

When law and duty are one, united by religion, you never become fully conscious, fully aware of yourself. You are always a little less than an individual.
-from "Muad'Dib: The Ninety-Nine Wonders of the Universe" by Princess Irulan

    The smuggler's spice factory with its parent carrier and ring of drone ornithopters came over a lifting of dunes like a swarm of insects following its queen. Ahead of the swarm lay one of the low rock ridges that lifted from the desert floor like small imitations of the Shield Wall. The dry beaches of the ridge were swept clean by a recent storm.
    In the con-bubble of the factory, Gurney Halleck leaned forward, adjusted the oil lenses of his binoculars and examined the landscape. Beyond the ridge, he could see a dark patch that might be a spiceblow, and he gave the signal to a hovering ornithopter that sent it to investigate.
    The 'thopter waggled its wings to indicate it had the signal. It broke away from the swarm, sped down toward the darkened sand, circled the area with its detectors dangling close to the surface.
    Almost immediately, it went through the wing-tucked dip and circle that told the waiting factory that spice had been found.
    Gurney sheathed his binoculars, knowing the others had seen the signal. He liked this spot. The ridge offered some shielding and protection. This was deep in the desert, an unlikely place for an ambush . . . still . . . Gurney signaled for a crew to hover over the ridge, to scan it, sent reserves to take up station in pattern around the area -- not too high because then they could be seen from afar by Harkonnen detectors.
    He doubted, though, that Harkonnen patrols would be this far south. This was still Fremen country.
    Gurney checked his weapons, damning the fate that made shields useless out here. Anything that summoned a worm had to be avoided at all costs. He rubbed the inkvine scar along his jaw, studying the scene, decided it would be safest to lead a ground party through the ridge. Inspection on foot was still the most certain. You couldn't be too careful when Fremen and Harkonnen were at each other's throats.
    It was Fremen that worried him here. They didn't mind trading for all the spice you could afford, but they were devils on the warpath if you stepped foot where they forbade you to go. And they were so devilishly cunning of late.
    It annoyed Gurney, the cunning and adroitness in battle of these natives. They displayed a sophistication in warfare as good as anything he had ever encountered, and he had been trained by the best fighters in the universe then seasoned in battles where only the superior few survived.
    Again Gurney scanned the landscape, wondering why he felt uneasy. Perhaps it was the worm they had seen . . . but that was on the other side of the ridge.
    A head popped up into the con-bubble beside Gurney -- the factory commander, a one-eyed old pirate with full beard, the blue eyes and milky teeth of a spice diet.
    "Looks like a rich patch, sir," the factory commander said. "Shall I take 'er in?"
    "Come down at the edge of that ridge," Gurney ordered. "Let me disembark with my men. You can tractor out to the spice from there. We'll have a look at that rock." 
    "Aye."
    "In case of trouble," Gurney said, "save the factory. We'll lift in the 'thopters."
    The factory commander saluted. "Aye, sir." He popped back down through the hatch.
    Again Gurney scanned the horizon. He had to respect the possibility that there were Fremen here and he was trespassing. Fremen worried him, their toughness and unpredictability. Many things about this business worried him, but the rewards were great. The fact that he couldn't send spotters high overhead worried him, too. The necessity of radio silence added to his uneasiness.
    The factory crawler turned, began to descend. Gently it glided down to the dry beach at the foot of the ridge. Treads touched sand.
    Gurney opened the bubble dome, released his safety straps. The instant the factory stopped, he was out, slamming the bubble closed behind him, scrambling out over the tread guards to swing down to the sand beyond the emergency netting. The five men of his personal guard were out with him, emerging from the nose hatch. Others released the factory's carrier wing. It detached, lifted away to fly in a parking circle low overhead.
    Immediately the big factory crawler lurched off, swinging away from the ridge toward the dark patch of spice out on the sand.
    A 'thopter swooped down nearby, skidded to a stop. Another followed and another. They disgorged Gurney's platoon and lifted to hoverflight.
    Gurney tested his muscles in his stillsuit, stretching. He left the filter mask off his face, losing moisture for the sake of a greater need -- the carrying power of his voice if he had to shout commands. He began climbing up into the rocks, checking the terrain -- pebbles and pea sand underfoot, the smell of spice.
    Good site for an emergency base, he thought. Might be sensible to bury a few supplies here.
    He glanced back, watching his men spread out as they followed him. Good men, even the new ones he hadn't had time to test. Good men. Didn't have to be told every time what to do. Not a shield glimmer showed on any of them. No cowards in this bunch, carrying shields into the desert where a worm could sense the field and come to rob them of the spice they found.
    From this slight elevation in the rocks, Gurney could see the spice patch about half a kilometer away and the crawler just reaching the near edge. He glanced up at the coverflight, noting the altitude -- not too high. He nodded to himself, turned to resume his climb up the ridge.
    In that instant, the ridge erupted.
    Twelve roaring paths of flame streaked upward to the hovering 'thopters and carrier wing. There came a blasting of metal from the factory crawler, and the rocks around Gurney were full of hooded fighting men.
    Gurney had time to think: By the horns of the Great Mother! Rockets! They dare to use rockets!
    Then he was face to face with a hooded figure who crouched low, crysknife at the ready. Two more men stood waiting on the rocks above to left and right. Only the eyes of the fighting man ahead of him were visible to Gurney between hood and veil of a sand-colored burnoose, but the crouch and readiness warned him that here was a trained fighting man. The eyes were the blue-in-blue of the deep-desert Fremen.
    Gurney moved one hand toward his own knife, kept his eyes fixed on the other's knife. If they dared use rockets, they'd have other projectile weapons. This moment argued extreme caution. He could tell by sound alone that at least part of his skycover had been knocked out. There were gruntings, too, the noise of several struggles behind him.
    The eyes of the fighting man ahead of Gurney followed the motion of hand toward knife, came back to glare into Gurney's eyes.
    "Leave the knife in its sheath, Gurney Halleck," the man said.
    Gurney hesitated. That voice sounded oddly familiar even through a stillsuit filter.
    "You know my name?" he said.
    "You've no need of a knife with me, Gurney," the man said. He straightened, slipped his crysknife into its sheath back beneath his robe. "Tell your men to stop their useless resistance." 
    The man threw his hood back, swung the filter aside.
    The shock of what he saw froze Gurney's muscles. He thought at first he was looking at a ghost image of Duke Leto Atreides. Full recognition came slowly.
    "Paul," he whispered. Then louder: "Is it truly Paul?" 
    "Don't you trust your own eyes?" Paul asked.
    "They said you were dead," Gurney rasped. He took a half-step forward.
    "Tell your men to submit," Paul commanded. He waved toward the lower reaches of the ridge.
    Gurney turned, reluctant to take his eyes off Paul. He saw only a few knots of struggle. Hooded desert men seemed to be everywhere around. The factory crawler lay silent with Fremen standing atop it. There were no aircraft overhead.
    "Stop the fighting," Gurney bellowed. He took a deep breath, cupped his hands for a megaphone. "This is Gurney Halleck! Stop the fight!"
    Slowly, warily, the struggling figures separated. Eyes turned toward him, questioning.
    "These are friends," Gurney called.
    "Fine friends!" someone shouted back. "Half our people murdered."
    "It's a mistake," Gurney said. "Don't add to it." 
    He turned back to Paul, stared into the youth's blue-blue Fremen eyes.
    A smile touched Paul's mouth, but there was a hardness in the expression that reminded Gurney of the Old Duke, Paul's grandfather. Gurney saw then the sinewy harshness in Paul that had never before been seen in an Atreides -- a leathery look to the skin, a squint to the eyes and calculation in the glance that seemed to weigh everything in sight.
    "They said you were dead," Gurney repeated.
    "And it seemed the best protection to let them think so," Paul said.
    Gurney realized that was all the apology he'd ever get for having been abandoned to his own resources, left to believe his young Duke . . . his friend, was dead. He wondered then if there were anything left here of the boy he had known and trained in the ways of fighting men.
    Paul took a step closer to Gurney, found that his eyes were smarting. "Gurney . . . "
    It seemed to happen of itself, and they were embracing, pounding each other on the back, feeling the reassurance of solid flesh. 
    "You young pup! You young pup!" Gurney kept saying. 
    And Paul: "Gurney, man! Gurney, man!"
    Presently, they stepped apart, looked at each other. Gurney took a deep breath. "So you're why the Fremen have grown so wise in battle tactics. I might've known. They keep doing things I could've planned myself. If I'd only known . . . " He shook his head. "If you'd only got word to me, lad. Nothing would've stopped me. I'd have come arunning and . . . " 
    A look in Paul's eyes stopped him . . . the hard, weighing stare.
    Gurney sighed. "Sure, and there'd have been those who wondered why Gurney Halleck went arunning, and some would've done more than question. They'd have gone hunting for answers." 
    Paul nodded, glanced to the waiting Fremen around them -- the looks of curious appraisal on the faces of the Fedaykin. He turned from the death commandos back to Gurney. Finding his former swordmaster filled him with elation. He saw it as a good omen, a sign that he was on the course of the future where all was well. 
    With Gurney at my side . . .
    Paul glanced down the ridge past the Fedaykin, studied the smuggler crew who had come with Halleck.
    "How do your men stand, Gurney?" he asked.
    "They're smugglers all," Gurney said. "They stand where the profit is."
    "Little enough profit in our venture," Paul said, and he noted the subtle finger signal flashed to him by Gurney's right hand -- the old hand code out of their past. There were men to fear and distrust in the smuggler crew.
    Paul pulled at his lip to indicate he understood, looked up at the men standing guard above them on the rocks. He saw Stilgar there. Memory of the unsolved problem with Stilgar cooled some of Paul's elation.
    "Stilgar," he said, "this is Gurney Halleck of whom you've heard me speak. My father's master-of-arms, one of the swordmasters who instructed me, an old friend. He can be trusted in any venture." 
    "I hear," Stilgar said. "You are his Duke."
    Paul stared at the dark visage above him, wondering at the reasons which had impelled Stilgar to say just that. His Duke. There had been a strange subtle intonation in Stilgar's voice, as though he would rather have said something else. And that wasn't like Stilgar, who was a leader of Fremen, a man who spoke his mind.
    My Duke! Gurney thought. He looked anew at Paul. Yes, with Leto dead, the title fell on Paul's shoulders.
    The pattern of the Fremen war on Arrakis began to take on new shape in Gurney's mind. My Duke! A place that had been dead within him began coming alive. Only part of his awareness focused on Paul's ordering the smuggler crew disarmed until they could be questioned.
    Gurney's mind returned to the command when he heard some of his men protesting. He shook his head, whirled. "Are you men deaf?" he barked. "This is the rightful Duke of Arrakis. Do as he commands." 
    Grumbling, the smugglers submitted.
    Paul moved up beside Gurney, spoke in a low voice. "I'd not have expected you to walk into this trap, Gurney." 
    "I'm properly chastened," Gurney said. "I'll wager yon patch of spice is little more than a sand grain's thickness, a bait to lure us."
    "That's a wager you'd win," Paul said. He looked down at the men being disarmed. "Are there any more of my father's men among your crew?"
    "None. We're spread thin. There're a few among the free traders. Most have spent their profits to leave this place."
    "But you stayed." 
    "I stayed." 
    "Because Rabban is here," Paul said.
    "I thought I had nothing left but revenge," Gurney said.
    An oddly chopped cry sounded from the ridgetop. Gurney looked up to see a Fremen waving his kerchief.
    "A maker comes," Paul said. He moved out to a point of rock with Gurney following, looked off to the southwest. The burrow mound of a worm could be seen in the middle distance, a dust-crowned track that cut directly through the dunes on a course toward the ridge.
    "He's big enough," Paul said.
    A clattering sound lifted from the factory crawler below them. It turned on its treads like a giant insect, lumbered toward the rocks. 
    "Too bad we couldn't have saved the carryall," Paul said.
    Gurney glanced at him, looked back to the patches of smoke and debris out on the desert where carryall and ornithopters had been brought down by Fremen rockets. He felt a sudden pang for the men lost there -- his men, and he said: "Your father would've been more concerned for the men he couldn't save."
    Paul shot a hard stare at him, lowered his gaze. Presently, he said: "They were your friends, Gurney. I understand. To us, though, they were trespassers who might see things they shouldn't see. You must understand that."
    "I understand it well enough," Gurney said. "Now, I'm curious to see what I shouldn't."
    Paul looked up to see the old and well-remembered wolfish grin on Halleck's face, the ripple of the inkvine scar along the man's jaw.
    Gurney nodded toward the desert below them. Fremen were going about their business all over the landscape. It struck him that none of them appeared worried by the approach of the worm.
    A thumping sounded from the open dunes beyond the baited patch of spice -- a deep drumming that seemed to be heard through their feet. Gurney saw Fremen spread out across the sand there in the path of the worm.
    The worm came on like some great sandfish, cresting the surface, its rings rippling and twisting. In a moment, from his vantage point above the desert, Gurney saw the taking of a worm -- the daring leap of the first hookman, the turning of the creature, the way an entire band of men went up the scaly, glistening curve of the worm's side. 
    "There's one of the things you shouldn't have seen," Paul said. 
    "There's been stories and rumors," Gurney said. "But it's not a thing easy to believe without seeing it." He shook his head. "The creature all men on Arrakis fear, you treat it like a riding animal." 
    "You heard my father speak of desert power," Paul said. "There it is. The surface of this planet is ours. No storm nor creature nor condition can stop us."
    Us, Gurney thought. He means the Fremen. He speaks of himself as one of them. Again, Gurney looked at the spice blue in Paul's eyes. His own eyes, he knew, had a touch of the color, but smugglers could get offworld foods and there was a subtle caste implication in the tone of the eyes among them. They spoke of "the touch of the spicebrush" to mean a man had gone too native. And there was always a hint of distrust in the idea.
    "There was a time when we did not ride the maker in the light of day in these latitudes," Paul said. "But Rabban has little enough air cover left that he can waste it looking for a few specks in the sand." He looked at Gurney. "Your aircraft were a shock to us here." 
    To us . . . to us . . . 
    Gurney shook his head to drive out such thoughts. "We weren't the shock to you that you were to us," he said.
    "What's the talk of Rabban in the sinks and villages?" Paul asked.
    "They say they've fortified the graben villages to the point where you cannot harm them. They say they need only sit inside their defenses while you wear yourselves out in futile attack." 
    "In a word," Paul said, "they're immobilized." 
    "While you can go where you will," Gurney said.
    "It's a tactic I learned from you," Paul said. "They've lost the initiative, which means they've lost the war." 
    Gurney smiled, a slow, knowing expression.
    "Our enemy is exactly where I want him to be," Paul said. He glanced at Gurney. "Well, Gurney, do you enlist with me for the finish of this campaign?"
    "Enlist?" Gurney stared at him. "My Lord, I've never left your service. You're the only one left me . . . to think you dead. And I, being cast adrift, made what shrift I could, waiting for the moment I might sell my life for what it's worth -- the death of Rabban." 
    An embarrassed silence settled over Paul.
    A woman came climbing up the rocks toward them, her eyes between stillsuit hood and facemask flicking between Paul and his companion. She stopped in front of Paul. Gurney noted the possessive air about her, the way she stood close to Paul.
    "Chani," Paul said, "this is Gurney Halleck. You've heard me speak of him."
    She looked at Halleck, back to Paul. "I have heard." 
    "Where did the men go on the maker?" Paul asked. 
    "They but diverted it to give us time to save the equipment." 
    "Well then . . ." Paul broke off, sniffed the air. 
    "There's wind coming," Chani said.
    A voice called out from the ridgetop above them: "Ho, there -- the wind!"
    Gurney saw a quickening of motion among the Fremen now -- a rushing about and sense of hurry. A thing the worm had not ignited was brought about by fear of the wind. The factory crawler lumbered up onto the dry beach below them and a way was opened for it among the rocks . . . and the rocks closed behind it so neatly that the passage escaped his eyes.
    "Have you many such hiding places?" Gurney asked.
    "Many times many," Paul said. He looked at Chani. "Find Korba. Tell him that Gurney has warned me there are men among this smuggler crew who're not to be trusted."
    She looked once at Gurney, back to Paul, nodded, and was off down the rocks, leaping with a gazelle-like agility. 
    "She is your woman," Gurney said.
    "The mother of my firstborn," Paul said. "There's another Leto among the Atreides." 
    Gurney accepted this with only a widening of the eyes.
    Paul watched the action around them with a critical eye. A curry color dominated the southern sky now and there came fitful bursts and gusts of wind that whipped dust around their heads.
    "Seal your suit," Paul said. And he fastened the mask and hood about his face.
    Gurney obeyed, thankful for the filters.
    Paul spoke, his voice muffled by the filter: "Which of your crew don't you trust, Gurney?"
    "There're some new recruits," Gurney said. "Offworlders . . . " He hesitated, wondering at himself suddenly. Offworlders. The word had come so easily to his tongue. 
    "Yes?" Paul said.
    "They're not like the usual fortune-hunting lot we get," Gurney said. "They're tougher." 
    "Harkonnen spies?" Paul asked.
    "I think m'Lord, that they report to no Harkonnen. I suspect they're men of the Imperial service. They have a hint of Salusa Secundus about them." 
    Paul shot a sharp glance at him. "Sardaukar?" 
    Gurney shrugged. "They could be, but it's well masked."
    Paul nodded, thinking how easily Gurney had fallen back into the pattern of Atreides retainer . . . but with subtle reservations . . . differences. Arrakis had changed him, too.
    Two hooded Fremen emerged from the broken rock below them, began climbing upward. One of them carried a large black bundle over one shoulder.
    "Where are my crew now?" Gurney asked.
    "Secure in the rocks below us," Paul said. "We've a cave here -- Cave of Birds. We'll decide what to do with them after the storm." 
    A voice called from above them: "Muad'Dib!" 
    Paul turned at the call, saw a Fremen guard motioning them down to the cave. Paul signaled he had heard.
    Gurney studying him with a new expression. "You're Muad'Dib?" he asked. "You're the will-o'-the-sand?" 
    "It's my Fremen name," Paul said.
    Gurney turned away, feeling an oppressive sense of foreboding. Half his own crew dead on the sand, the others captive. He did not care about the new recruits, the suspicious ones, but among the others were good men, friends, people for whom he felt responsible. "We'll decide what to do with them after the storm." That's what Paul had said, Muad'Dib had said. And Gurney recalled the stories told of Muad'Dib, the Lisan al-Gaib -- how he had taken the skin of a Harkonnen officer to make his drumheads, how he was surrounded by death commandos, Fedaykin who leaped into battle with their death chants on their lips. 
    Him.
    The two Fremen climbing up the rocks leaped lightly to a shelf in front of Paul. The dark-faced one said: "All secure, Muad'Dib. We best get below now." 
    "Right."
    Gurney noted the tone of the man's voice -- half command and half request. This was the man called Stilgar, another figure of the new Fremen legends.
    Paul looked at the bundle the other man carried, said: "Korba, what's in the bundle?"
    Stilgar answered: " 'Twas in the crawler. It had the initial of your friend here and it contains a baliset. Many times have I heard you speak of the prowess of Gurney Halleck on the baliset." 
    Gurney studied the speaker, seeing the edge of black beard above the stillsuit mask, the hawk stare, the chiseled nose.
    "You've a companion who thinks, m'Lord," Gurney said. "Thank you, Stilgar."
    Stilgar signaled for his companion to pass the bundle to Gurney, said: "Thank your Lord Duke. His countenance earns your admittance here."
    Gurney accepted the bundle, puzzled by the hard undertones in this conversation. There was an air of challenge about the man, and Gurney wondered if it could be a feeling of jealousy in the Fremen. Here was someone called Gurney Halleck who'd known Paul even in the times before Arrakis, a man who shared a camaraderie that Stilgar could never invade.
    "You are two I'd have be friends," Paul said.
    "Stilgar, the Fremen, is a name of renown," Gurney said. "Any killer of Harkonnens I'd feel honored to count among my friends."
    "Will you touch hands with my friend Gurney Halleck, Stilgar?" Paul asked.
    Slowly, Stilgar extended his hand, gripped the heavy calluses of Gurney's swordhand. "There're few who haven't heard the name of Gurney Halleck," he said, and released his grip. He turned to Paul. "The storm comes rushing." 
    "At once," Paul said.
    Stilgar turned away, led them down through the rocks, a twisting and turning path into a shadowed cleft that admitted them to the low entrance of a cave. Men hurried to fasten a doorseal behind them. Glowglobes showed a broad, dome-ceilinged space with a raised ledge on one side and a passage leading off from it.
    Paul leaped to the ledge with Gurney right behind him, led the way into the passage. The others headed for another passage opposite the entrance. Paul led the way through an anteroom and into a chamber with dark, wine-colored hangings on its walls.
    "We can have some privacy here for a while," Paul said. "The others will respect my --"
    An alarm cymbal clanged from the outer chamber, was followed by shouting and clashing of weapons. Paul whirled, ran back through the anteroom and out onto the atrium lip above the outer chamber. Gurney was right behind, weapon drawn.
    Beneath them on the floor of the cave swirled a melee of struggling figures. Paul stood an instant assessing the scene, separating the Fremen robes and bourkas from the costumes of those they opposed. Senses that his mother had trained to detect the most subtle clues picked out a significant fact -- the Fremen fought against men wearing smuggler robes, but the smugglers were crouched in trios, backed into triangles where pressed.
    That habit of close fighting was a trademark of the Imperial Sardaukar.
    A Fedaykin in the crowd saw Paul, and his battlecry was lifted to echo in the chamber: "Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib!" 
    Another eye had also picked Paul out. A black knife came hurtling toward him. Paul dodged, heard the knife clatter against stone behind him, glanced to see Gurney retrieve it. 
    The triangular knots were being pressed back now. 
    Gurney held the knife up in front of Paul's eyes, pointed to the hairline yellow coil of Imperial color, the golden lion crest, multifaceted eyes at the pommel. 
    Sardaukar for certain.
    Paul stepped out to the lip of the ledge. Only three of the Sardaukar remained. Bloody rag mounds of Sardaukar and Fremen lay in a twisted pattern across the chamber.
    "Hold!" Paul shouted. "The Duke Paul Atreides commands you to hold!" 
    The fighting wavered, hesitated.
    "You Sardaukar!" Paul called to the remaining group. "By whose orders do you threaten a ruling Duke?" And, quickly, as his men started to press in around the Sardaukar: "Hold, I say!" 
    One of the cornered trio straightened. "Who says we're Sardaukar?" he demanded.
    Paul took the knife from Gurney, held it aloft. "This says you're Sardaukar." 
    "Then who says you're a ruling Duke?" the man demanded.
    Paul gestured to the Fedaykin. "These men say I'm a ruling Duke. Your own emperor bestowed Arrakis on House Atreides. I am House Atreides." 
    The Sardaukar stood silent, fidgeting.
    Paul studied the man -- tall, flat-featured, with a pale scar across half his left cheek. Anger and confusion were betrayed in his manner, but still there was that pride about him without which a Sardaukar appeared undressed -- and with which he could appear fully clothed though naked.
    Paul glanced to one of his Fedaykin lieutenants, said: "Korba, how came they to have weapons?"
    "They held back knives concealed in cunning pockets within their stillsuits," the lieutenant said.
    Paul surveyed the dead and wounded across the chamber, brought his attention back to the lieutenant. There was no need for words. The lieutenant lowered his eyes.
    "Where is Chani?" Paul asked and waited, breath held, for the answer.
    "Stilgar spirited her aside." He nodded toward the other passage, glanced at the dead and wounded. "I hold myself responsible for this mistake, Muad'Dib."
    "How many of these Sardaukar were there, Gurney?" Paul asked.
    "Ten."
    Paul leaped lightly to the floor of the chamber, strode across to stand within striking distance of the Sardaukar spokesman.
    A tense air came over the Fedaykin. They did not like him thus exposed to danger. This was the thing they were pledged to prevent because the Fremen wished to preserve the wisdom of Muad'Dib.
    Without turning, Paul spoke to his lieutenant: "How many are our casualties?" 
    "Four wounded, two dead, Muad'Dib."
    Paul saw motion beyond the Sardaukar, Chani and Stilgar were standing in the other passage. He returned his attention to the Sardaukar, staring into the offworld whites of the spokesman's eyes. "You, what is your name?" Paul demanded. 
    The man stiffened, glanced left and right.
    "Don't try it," Paul said. "It's obvious to me that you were ordered to seek out and destroy Muad'Dib. I'll warrant you were the ones suggested seeking spice in the deep desert." 
    A gasp from Gurney behind him brought a thin smile to Paul's lips.
    Blood suffused the Sardaukar's face.
    "What you see before you is more than Muad'Dib," Paul said. "Seven of you are dead for two of us. Three for one. Pretty good against Sardaukar, eh?"
    The man came up on his toes, sank back as the Fedaykin pressed forward.
    "I asked your name," Paul said, and he called up the subtleties of Voice: "Tell me your name!"
    "Captain Aramsham, Imperial Sardaukar!" the man snapped. His jaw dropped. He stared at Paul in confusion. The manner about him that had dismissed this cavern as a barbarian warren melted away.
    "Well, Captain Aramsham," Paul said, "the Harkonnens would pay dearly to learn what you now know. And the Emperor -- what he wouldn't give to learn an Atreides still lives despite his treachery." 
    The captain glanced left and right at the two men remaining to him. Paul could almost see the thoughts turning over in the man's head. Sardaukar did not submit, but the Emperor had to learn of this threat.
    Still using the Voice, Paul said: "Submit, Captain."
    The man at the captain's left leaped without warning toward Paul, met the flashing impact of his own captain's knife in his chest. The attacker hit the floor in a sodden heap with the knife still in him.
    The captain faced his sole remaining companion. "I decide what best serves His Majesty," he said. "Understood?" 
    The other Sardaukar's shoulders slumped. 
    "Drop your weapon," the captain said. 
    The Sardaukar obeyed.
    The captain returned his attention to Paul. "I have killed a friend for you," he said. "Let us always remember that." 
    "You're my prisoners," Paul said. "You submitted to me. Whether you live or die is of no importance." He motioned to his guard to take the two Sardaukar, signaled the lieutenant who had searched the prisoners.
    The guard moved in, hustled the Sardaukar away. 
    Paul bent toward his lieutenant.
    "Muad'Dib," the man said. "I failed you in . . . " 
    "The failure was mine, Korba," Paul said. "I should've warned you what to seek. In the future, when searching Sardaukar, remember this. Remember, too, that each has a false toenail or two that can be combined with other items secreted about their bodies to make an effective transmitter. They'll have more than one false tooth. They carry coils of shigawire in their hair -- so fine you can barely detect it, yet strong enough to garrote a man and cut off his head in the process. With Sardaukar, you must scan them, scope them -- both reflex and hard ray -- cut off every scrap of body hair. And when you're through, be certain you haven't discovered everything." 
    He looked up at Gurney, who had moved close to listen. 
    "Then we best kill them," the lieutenant said.
    Paul shook his head, still looking at Gurney. "No. I want them to escape." Gurney stared at him. 
    "Sire . . . " he breathed. 
    "Yes?"
    "Your man here is right. Kill those prisoners at once. Destroy all evidence of them. You've shamed Imperial Sardaukar! When the Emperor learns that he'll not rest until he has you over a slow fire."
    "The Emperor's not likely to have that power over me," Paul said. He spoke slowly, coldly. Something had happened inside him while he faced the Sardaukar. A sum of decisions had accumulated in his awareness. "Gurney," he said, "are there many Guildsmen around Rabban?"
    Gurney straightened, eyes narrowed. "Your question makes no . . . " 
    "Are there?" Paul barked.
    "Arrakis is crawling with Guild agents. They're buying spice as though it were the most precious thing in the universe. Why else do you think we ventured this far into . . . "
    "It is the most precious thing in the universe," Paul said. "To them."
    He looked toward Stilgar and Chani who were now crossing the chamber toward him. "And we control it, Gurney." 
    "The Harkonnens control it!" Gurney protested.
    "The people who can destroy a thing, they control it," Paul said. He waved a hand to silence further remarks from Gurney, nodded to Stilgar who stopped in front of Paul, Chani beside him.
    Paul took the Sardaukar knife in his left hand, presented it to Stilgar. "You live for the good of the tribe," Paul said. "Could you draw my life's blood with that knife?" 
    "For the good of the tribe," Stilgar growled. 
    "Then use that knife," Paul said.
    "Are you calling me out?" Stilgar demanded.
    "If I do," Paul said, "I shall stand there without weapon and let you slay me." 
    Stilgar drew in a quick, sharp breath.
    Chani said, "Usul!" then glanced at Gurney, back to Paul.
    While Stilgar was still weighing his words, Paul said: "You are Stilgar, a fighting man. When the Sardaukar began fighting here, you were not in the front of battle. Your first thought was to protect Chani."
    "She's my niece," Stilgar said. "If there'd been any doubt of your Fedaykin handling those scum . . . " 
    "Why was your first thought of Chani?" Paul demanded. 
    "It wasn't!" 
    "Oh?" 
    "It was of you," Stilgar admitted.
    "Do you think you could lift your hand against me?" Paul asked. Stilgar began to tremble. "It's the way," he muttered.
    "It's the way to kill offworld strangers found in the desert and take their water as a gift from Shai-hulud," Paul said. "Yet you permitted two such to live one night, my mother and myself." 
    As Stilgar remained silent, trembling, staring at him, Paul said: "Ways change, Stil. You have changed them yourself." 
    Stilgar looked down at the yellow emblem on the knife he held. 
    "When I am Duke in Arrakeen with Chani by my side, do you think I'll have time to concern myself with every detail of governing Tabr sietch?" Paul asked. "Do you concern yourself with the internal problems of every family?" 
    Stilgar continued staring at the knife.
    "Do you think I wish to cut off my right arm?" Paul demanded. 
    Slowly, Stilgar looked up at him.
    "You!" Paul said. "Do you think I wish to deprive myself or the tribe of your wisdom and strength?"
    In a low voice, Stilgar said: "The young man of my tribe whose name is known to me, this young man I could kill on the challenge floor, Shai-hulud willing. The Lisan al-Gaib, him I could not harm. You knew this when you handed me this knife." 
    "I knew it," Paul agreed.
    Stilgar opened his hand. The knife clattered against the stone of the floor. "Ways change," he said.
    "Chani," Paul said, "go to my mother, send her here that her counsel will be available in --" 
    "But you said we would go to the south!" she protested.
    "I was wrong," he said. "The Harkonnens are not there. The war is not there."
    She took a deep breath, accepting this as a desert woman accepted all necessities in the midst of a life involved with death.
    "You will give my mother a message for her ears alone," Paul said. "Tell her that Stilgar acknowledges me Duke of Arrakis, but a way must be found to make the young men accept this without combat." 
    Chani glanced at Stilgar.
    "Do as he says," Stilgar growled. "We both know he could overcome me . . . and I could not raise my hand against him . . . for the good of the tribe." 
    "I shall return with your mother," Chani said.
    "Send her," Paul said. "Stilgar's instinct was right. I am stronger when you are safe. You will remain in the sietch." 
    She started to protest, swallowed it.
    "Sihaya," Paul said, using his intimate name for her. He whirled away to the right, met Gurney's glaring eyes.
    The interchange between Paul and the older Fremen had passed as though in a cloud around Gurney since Paul's reference to his mother.
    "Your mother," Gurney said.
    "Idaho saved us the night of the raid," Paul said, distracted by the parting with Chani. "Right now we've --" 
    "What of Duncan Idaho, m'Lord?" Gurney asked.
    "He's dead -- buying us a bit of time to escape." 
    The she-witch alive! Gurney thought. The one I swore vengeance against, alive! And it's obvious Duke Paul doesn't know what manner of creature gave him birth. The evil one! Betrayed his own father to the Harkonnens!
    Paul pressed past him, jumped up to the ledge. He glanced back, noted that the wounded and dead had been removed, and he thought bitterly that here was another chapter in the legend of Paul Muad'Dib. I didn't even draw my knife, but it'll be said of this day that I slew twenty Sardaukar by my own hand.
    Gurney followed with Stilgar, stepping on ground that he did not even feel. The cavern with its yellow light of glowglobes was forced out of his thoughts by rage. The she-witch alive while those she betrayed are bones in lonesome graves. I must contrive it that Paul learns the truth about her before I slay her.

= = = = = =

How often it is that the angry man rages denial of what his inner self is telling him.
-"The Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib" by the Princess Irulan

    The crowd in the cavern assembly chamber radiated that pack feeling Jessica had sensed the day Paul killed Jamis. There was murmuring nervousness in the voices. Little cliques gathered like knots among the robes.
    Jessica tucked a message cylinder beneath her robe as she emerged to the ledge from Paul's private quarters. She felt rested after the long journey up from the south, but still rankled that Paul would not yet permit them to use the captured ornithopters.
    "We do not have full control of the air," he had said. "And we must not become dependent upon offworld fuel. Both fuel and aircraft must be gathered and saved for the day of maximum effort."
    Paul stood with a group of the younger men near the ledge. The pale light of glowglobes gave the scene a tinge of unreality. It was like a tableau, but with the added dimension of warren smells, the whispers, the sounds of shuffling feet.
    She studied her son, wondering why he had not yet trotted out his surprise -- Gurney Halleck. Thought of Gurney disturbed her with its memories of an easier past -- days of love and beauty with Paul's father.
    Stilgar waited with a small group of his own at the other end of the ledge. There was a feeling of inevitable dignity about him, the way he stood without talking.
    We must not lose that man, Jessica thought. Paul's plan must work. Anything else would be highest tragedy.
    She strode down the ledge, passing Stilgar without a glance, stepped down into the crowd. A way was made for her as she headed toward Paul. And silence followed her.
    She knew the meaning of the silence -- the unspoken questions of the people, awe of the Reverend Mother.
    The young men drew back from Paul as she came up to him, and she found herself momentarily dismayed by the new deference they paid him. "All men beneath your position covet your station," went the Bene Gesserit axiom. But she found no covetousness in these faces. They were held at a distance by the religious ferment around Paul's leadership. And she recalled another Bene Gesserit saying: "Prophets have a way of dying by violence." 
    Paul looked at her.
    "It's time," she said, and passed the message cylinder to him.
    One of Paul's companions, bolder than the others, glanced across at Stilgar, said: "Are you going to call him out, Muad'Dib? Now's the time for sure. They'll think you a coward if you --" 
    "Who dares call me coward?" Paul demanded. His hand flashed to his crysknife hilt.
    Bated silence came over the group, spreading out into the crowd.
    "There's work to do," Paul said as the man drew back from him. Paul turned away, shouldered through the crowd to the ledge, leaped lightly up to it and faced the people. 
    "Do it!" someone shrieked.
    Murmurs and whispers arose behind the shriek.
    Paul waited for silence. It came slowly amidst scattered shufflings and coughs. When it was quiet in the cavern, Paul lifted his chin, spoke in a voice that carried to the farthest corners. 
    "You are tired of waiting," Paul said.
    Again, he waited while the cries of response died out.
    Indeed, they are tired of waiting, Paul thought. He hefted the message cylinder, thinking of what it contained. His mother had showed it to him, explaining how it had been taken from a Harkonnen courier.
    The message was explicit: Rabban was being abandoned to his own resources here on Arrakis! He could not call for help or reinforcements!
    Again, Paul raised his voice: "You think it's time I called out Stilgar and changed the leadership of the troops!" Before they could respond, Paul hurled his voice at them in anger: "Do you think the Lisan al-Gaib that stupid?" 
    There was stunned silence.
    He's accepting the religious mantle, Jessica thought. He must not do it!
    "It's the way!" someone shouted.
    Paul spoke dryly, probing the emotional undercurrents. "Ways change."
    An angry voice lifted from a corner of the cavern: "We'll say what's to change!" 
    There were scattered shouts of agreement through the throng. 
    "As you wish," Paul said.
    And Jessica heard the subtle intonations as he used the powers of Voice she had taught him.
    "You will say," he agreed. "But first you will hear my say." 
    Stilgar moved along the ledge, his bearded face impassive. "That is the way, too," he said. "The voice of any Fremen may be heard in Council. Paul-Muad'Dib is a Fremen."
    "The good of the tribe, that is the most important thing, eh?" Paul asked.
    Still with that flat-voiced dignity, Stilgar said: "Thus our steps are guided."
    "All right," Paul said. "Then, who rules this troop of our tribe -- and who rules all the tribes and troops through the fighting instructors we've trained in the weirding way?"
    Paul waited, looking over the heads of the throng. No answer came.
    Presently, he said: "Does Stilgar rule all this? He says himself that he does not. Do I rule? Even Stilgar does my bidding on occasion, and the sages, the wisest of the wise, listen to me and honor me in Council."
    There was shuffling silence among the crowd.
    "So," Paul said. "Does my mother rule?" He pointed down to Jessica in her black robes of office among them. "Stilgar and all the other troop leaders ask her advice in almost every major decision. You know this. But does a Reverend Mother walk the sand or lead a razzia against the Harkonnens?"
    Frowns creased the foreheads of those Paul could see, but still there were angry murmurs.
    This is a dangerous way to do it, Jessica thought, but she remembered the message cylinder and what it implied. And she saw Paul's intent: Go right to the depth of their uncertainty, dispose of that, and all the rest must follow.
    "No man recognizes leadership without the challenge and the combat, eh?" Paul asked.
    "That's the way!" someone shouted.
    "What's our goal?" Paul asked. "To unseat Rabban, the Harkonnen beast, and remake our world into a place where we may raise our families in happiness amidst an abundance of water -- is this our goal?" 
    "Hard tasks need hard ways," someone shouted.
    "Do you smash your knife before a battle?" Paul demanded. "I say this as fact, not meaning it as boast or challenge: there isn't a man here, Stilgar included, who could stand against me in single combat. This is Stilgar's own admission. He knows it, so do you all."
    Again, the angry mutters lifted from the crowd.
    "Many of you have been with me on the practice floor," Paul said. "You know this isn't idle boast. I say it because it's fact known to us all, and I'd be foolish not to see it for myself. I began training in these ways earlier than you did and my teachers were tougher than any you've ever seen. How else do you think I bested Jamis at an age when your boys are still fighting only mock battles?"
    He's using the Voice well, Jessica thought, but that's not enough with these people. They've good insulation against vocal control. He must catch them also with logic.
    "So," Paul said, "we come to this." He lifted the message cylinder, removed its scrap of tape. "This was taken from a Harkonnen courier. Its authenticity is beyond question. It is addressed to Rabban. It tells him that his request for new troops is denied, that his spice harvest is far below quota, that he must wring more spice from Arrakis with the people he has." 
    Stilgar moved up beside Paul.
    "How many of you see what this means?" Paul asked. "Stilgar saw it immediately."
    "They're cut off!" someone shouted.
    Paul pushed message and cylinder into his sash. From his neck he took a braided shigawire cord and removed a ring from the cord, holding the ring aloft.
    "This was my father's ducal signet," he said. "I swore never to wear it again until I was ready to lead my troops over all of Arrakis and claim it as my rightful fief." He put the ring on his finger, clenched his fist.
    Utter stillness gripped the cavern.
    "Who rules here?" Paul asked. He raised his fist. "I rule here! I rule on every square inch of Arrakis! This is my ducal fief whether the Emperor says yea or nay! He gave it to my father and it comes to me through my father!"
    Paul lifted himself onto his toes, settled back to his heels. He studied the crowd, feeling their temper. 
    Almost, he thought.
    "There are men here who will hold positions of importance on Arrakis when I claim those Imperial rights which are mine," Paul said. "Stilgar is one of those men. Not because I wish to bribe him! Not out of gratitude, though I'm one of many here who owe him life for life. No! But because he's wise and strong. Because he governs this troop by his own intelligence and not just by rules. Do you think me stupid? Do you think I'll cut off my right arm and leave it bloody on the floor of this cavern just to provide you with a circus?" 
    Paul swept a hard gaze across the throng. "Who is there here to say I'm not the rightful ruler on Arrakis? Must I prove it by leaving every Fremen tribe in the erg without a leader?" 
    Beside Paul, Stilgar stirred, looked at him questioningly.
    "Will I subtract from our strength when we need it most?" Paul asked. "I am your ruler, and I say to you that it is time we stopped killing off our best men and started killing our real enemies -- the Harkonnens!"
    In one blurred motion, Stilgar had his crysknife out and pointed over the heads of the throng. "Long live Duke Paul-Muad'Dib!" he shouted.
    A deafening roar filled the cavern, echoed and re-echoed. They were cheering and chanting: "Ya hya chouhada! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Ya hya chouhada!"
    Jessica translated it to herself: "Long live the fighters of Muad'Dib!" The scene she and Paul and Stilgar had cooked up between them had worked as they'd planned. 
    The tumult died slowly.
    When silence was restored, Paul faced Stilgar, said: "Kneel, Stilgar."
    Stilgar dropped to his knees on the ledge. 
    "Hand me your crysknife," Paul said. 
    Stilgar obeyed.
    This was not as we planned it, Jessica thought.
    "Repeat after me, Stilgar," Paul said, and he called up the words of investiture as he had heard his own father use them. "I, Stilgar, take this knife from the hands of my Duke."
    "I, Stilgar, take this knife from the hands of my Duke," Stilgar said, and accepted the milky blade from Paul.
    "Where my Duke commands, there shall I place this blade," Paul said.
    Stilgar repeated the words, speaking slowly and solemnly.
    Remembering the source of the rite, Jessica blinked back tears, shook her head. I know the reasons for this, she thought. I shouldn't let it stir me.
    "I dedicate this blade to the cause of my Duke and the death of his enemies for as long as our blood shall flow," Paul said. 
    Stilgar repeated it after him. 
    "Kiss the blade," Paul ordered.
    Stilgar obeyed, then, in the Fremen manner, kissed Paul's knife arm. At a nod from Paul, he sheathed the blade, got to his feet.
    A sighing whisper of awe passed through the crowd, and Jessica heard the words: "The prophecy -- A Bene Gesserit shall show the way and a Reverend Mother shall see it." And, from farther away: "She shows us through her son!"
    "Stilgar leads this tribe," Paul said. "Let no man mistake that. He commands with my voice. What he tells you, it is as though I told you."
    Wise, Jessica thought. The tribal commander must lose no face among those who should obey him.
    Paul lowered his voice, said: "Stilgar, I want sandwalkers out this night and cielagos sent to summon a Council Gathering. When you've sent them, bring Chatt, Korba and Otheym and two other lieutenants of your own choosing. Bring them to my quarters for battle planning. We must have a victory to show the Council of Leaders when they arrive."
    Paul nodded for his mother to accompany him, led the way down off the ledge and through the throng toward the central passage and the living chambers that had been prepared there. As Paul pressed through the crowd, hands reached out to touch him. Voices called out to him.
    "My knife goes where Stilgar commands it, Paul-Muad'Dib! Let us fight soon, Paul-Muad'Dib! Let us wet our world with the blood of Harkonnens!"
    Feeling the emotions of the throng, Jessica sensed the fighting edge of these people. They could not be more ready. We are taking them at the crest, she thought.
    In the inner chamber, Paul motioned his mother to be seated, said: "Wait here." And he ducked through the hangings to the side passage.
    It was quiet in the chamber after Paul had gone, so quiet behind the hangings that not even the faint soughing of the wind pumps that circulated air in the sietch penetrated to where she sat.
    He is going to bring Gurney Halleck here, she thought. And she wondered at the strange mingling of emotions that filled her. Gurney and his music had been a part of so many pleasant times on Caladan before the move to Arrakis. She felt that Caladan had happened to some other person. In the nearly three years since then, she had become another person. Having to confront Gurney forced a reassessment of the changes.
    Paul's coffee service, the fluted alloy of silver and jasmium that he had inherited from Jamis, rested on a low table to her right. She stared at it, thinking of how many hands had touched that metal. Chani had served Paul from it within the month.
    What can his desert woman do for a Duke except serve him coffee? she asked herself. She brings him no power, no family. Paul has only one major chance -- to ally himself with a powerful Great House, perhaps even with the Imperial family. There are marriageable princesses, after all, and every one of them Bene Gesserit trained.
    Jessica imagined herself leaving the rigors of Arrakis for the life of power and security she could know as mother of a royal consort. She glanced at the thick hangings that obscured the rock of this cavern cell, thinking of how she had come here -- riding amidst a host of worms, the palanquins and pack platforms piled high with necessities for the coming campaign.
    As long as Chani lives, Paul will not see his duty, Jessica thought. She has given him a son and that is enough.
    A sudden longing to see her grandson, the child whose likeness carried so much of the grandfather's features -- so like Leto, swept through her. Jessica placed her palms against her cheeks, began the ritual breathing that stilled emotion and clarified the mind, then bent forward from the waist in the devotional exercise that prepared the body for the mind's demands.
    Paul's choice of this Cave of Birds as his command post could not be questioned, she knew. It was ideal. And to the north lay Wind Pass opening onto a protected village in a cliff-walled sink. It was a key village, home of artisans and technicians, maintenance center for an entire Harkonnen defensive sector.
    A cough sounded outside the chamber hangings. Jessica straightened, took a deep breath, exhaled slowly. "Enter," she said.
    Draperies were flung aside and Gurney Halleck bounded into the room. She had only time for a glimpse of his face with its odd grimace, then he was behind her, lifting her to her feet with one brawny arm beneath her chin.
    "Gurney, you fool, what are you doing?" she demanded.
    Then she felt the touch of the knife tip against her back. Chill awareness spread out from that knife tip. She knew in that instant that Gurney meant to kill her. Why? She could think of no reason, for he wasn't the kind to turn traitor. But she felt certain of his intention. Knowing it, her mind churned. Here was no man to be overcome easily. Here was a killer wary of the Voice, wary of every combat stratagem, wary of every trick of death and violence. Here was an instrument she herself had helped train with subtle hints and suggestions.
    "You thought you had escaped, eh, witch?" Gurney snarled.
    Before she could turn the question over in her mind or try to answer, the curtains parted and Paul entered.
    "Here he is, Moth --" Paul broke off, taking in the tensions of the scene.
    "You will stand where you are, m'Lord," Gurney said. 
    "What . . . " Paul shook his head.
    Jessica started to speak, felt the arm tighten against her throat.
    "You will speak only when I permit it, witch," Gurney said. "I want only one thing from you for your son to hear it, and I am prepared to send this knife into your heart by reflex at the first sign of a counter against me. Your voice will remain in a monotone. Certain muscles you will not tense or move. You will act with the most extreme caution to gain yourself a few more seconds of life. And I assure you, these are all you have." 
    Paul took a step forward. "Gurney, man, what is --" 
    "Stop right where you are!" Gurney snapped. "One more step and she's dead."
    Paul's hand slipped to his knife hilt. He spoke in a deadly quiet: "You had best explain yourself, Gurney."
    "I swore an oath to slay the betrayer of your father," Gurney said. "Do you think I can forget the man who rescued me from a Harkonnen slave pit, gave me freedom, life, and honor . . . gave me friendship, a thing I prized above all else? I have his betrayer under my knife. No one can stop me from --" 
    "You couldn't be more wrong, Gurney," Paul said. 
    And Jessica thought: So that's it! What irony!
    "Wrong, am I?" Gurney demanded. "Let us hear it from the woman herself. And let her remember that I have bribed and spied and cheated to confirm this charge. I've even pushed semuta on a Harkonnen guard captain to get part of the story." 
    Jessica felt the arm at her throat ease slightly, but before she could speak, Paul said: "The betrayer was Yueh. I tell you this once, Gurney. The evidence is complete, cannot be controverted. It was Yueh. I do not care how you came by your suspicion -- for it can be nothing else -- but if you harm my mother . . . " Paul lifted his crysknife from its scabbard, held the blade in front of him. ". . . I'll have your blood."
    "Yueh was a conditioned medic, fit for a royal house," Gurney snarled. "He could not turn traitor!" 
    "I know a way to remove that conditioning," Paul said. 
    "Evidence," Gurney insisted.
    "The evidence is not here," Paul said. "It's in Tabr sietch, far to the south, but if --"
    "This is a trick," Gurney snarled, and his arm tightened on Jessica's throat.
    "No trick, Gurney," Paul said, and his voice carried such a note of terrible sadness that the sound tore at Jessica's heart.
    "I saw the message captured from the Harkonnen agent," Gurney said. "The note pointed directly at --"
    "I saw it, too," Paul said. "My father showed it to me the night he explained why it had to be a Harkonnen trick aimed at making him suspect the woman he loved." 
    "Ayah!" Gurney said. "You've not --"
    "Be quiet," Paul said, and the monotone stillness of his words carried more command than Jessica had ever heard in another voice. 
    He has the Great Control, she thought.
    Gurney's arm trembled against her neck. The point of the knife at her back moved with uncertainty.
    "What you have not done," Paul said, "is heard my mother sobbing in the night over her lost Duke. You have not seen her eyes stab flame when she speaks of killing Harkonnens." 
    So he has listened, she thought. Tears blinded her eyes.
    "What you have not done," Paul went on, "is remembered the lessons you learned in a Harkonnen slave pit. You speak of pride in my father's friendship! Didn't you learn the difference between Harkonnen and Atreides so that you could smell a Harkonnen trick by the stink they left on it? Didn't you learn that Atreides loyalty is bought with love while the Harkonnen coin is hate? Couldn't you see through to the very nature of this betrayal?" 
    "But Yueh?" Gurney muttered.
    "The evidence we have is Yueh's own message to us admitting his treachery," Paul said. "I swear this to you by the love I hold for you, a love I will still hold even after I leave you dead on this floor." 
    Hearing her son, Jessica marveled at the awareness in him, the penetrating insight of his intelligence.
    "My father had an instinct for his friends," Paul said. "He gave his love sparingly, but with never an error. His weakness lay in misunderstanding hatred. He thought anyone who hated Harkonnens could not betray him." He glanced at his mother. "She knows this. I've given her my father's message that he never distrusted her."
    Jessica felt herself losing control, bit at her lower lip. Seeing the stiff formality in Paul, she realized what these words were costing him. She wanted to run to him, cradle his head against her breast as she never had done. But the arm against her throat had ceased its trembling; the knifepoint at her back pressed still and sharp.
    "One of the most terrible moments in a boy's life," Paul said, "is when he discovers his father and mother are human beings who share a love that he can never quite taste. It's a loss, an awakening to the fact that the world is there and here and we are in it alone. The moment carries its own truth; you can't evade it. I heard my father when he spoke of my mother. She's not the betrayer, Gurney." 
    Jessica found her voice, said: "Gurney, release me." There was no special command in the words, no trick to play on his weaknesses, but Gurney's hand fell away. She crossed to Paul, stood in front of him, not touching him.
    "Paul," she said, "there are other awakenings in this universe. I suddenly see how I've used you and twisted you and manipulated you to set you on a course of my choosing . . . a course I had to choose -- if that's any excuse -- because of my own training." She swallowed past a lump in her throat, looked up into her son's eyes. "Paul . . . I want you to do something for me: choose the course of happiness. Your desert woman, marry her if that's your wish. Defy everyone and everything to do this. But choose your own course. I . . . " 
    She broke off, stopped by the low sound of muttering behind her. 
    Gurney!
    She saw Paul's eyes directed beyond her, turned.
    Gurney stood in the same spot, but had sheathed his knife, pulled the robe away from his breast to expose the slick grayness of an issue stillsuit, the type the smugglers traded for among the sietch warrens.
    "Put your knife right here in my breast," Gurney muttered. "I say kill me and have done with it. I've besmirched my name. I've betrayed my own Duke! The finest --" 
    "Be still!" Paul said. 
    Gurney stared at him.
    "Close that robe and stop acting like a fool," Paul said. "I've had enough foolishness for one day." 
    "Kill me, I say!" Gurney raged.
    "You know me better than that," Paul said. "How many kinds of an idiot do you think I am? Must I go through this with every man I need?"
    Gurney looked at Jessica, spoke in a forlorn, pleading note so unlike him: "Then you, my Lady, please . . . you kill me."
    Jessica crossed to him, put her hands on his shoulders. "Gurney, why do you insist the Atreides must kill those they love?" Gently, she pulled the spread robe out of his fingers, closed and fastened the fabric over his chest.
    Gurney spoke brokenly; "But . . . I . . . "
    "You thought you were doing a thing for Leto," she said, "and for this I honor you."
    "My Lady," Gurney said. He dropped his chin to his chest, squeezed his eyelids closed against the tears.
    "Let us think of this as a misunderstanding among old friends," she said, and Paul heard the soothers, the adjusting tones in her voice. "It's over and we can be thankful we'll never again have that sort of misunderstanding between us." 
    Gurney opened eyes bright with moisture, looked down at her.
    "The Gurney Halleck I knew was a man adept with both blade and baliset," Jessica said. "It was the man of the baliset I most admired. Doesn't that Gurney Halleck remember how I used to enjoy listening by the hour while he played for me? Do you still have a baliset, Gurney?"
    "I've a new one," Gurney said. "Brought from Chusuk, a sweet instrument. Plays like a genuine Varota, though there's no signature on it. I think myself it was made by a student of Varota's who . . ." He broke off. "What can I say to you, my Lady? Here we prattle about --"
    "Not prattle, Gurney," Paul said. He crossed to stand beside his mother, eye to eye with Gurney. "Not prattle, but a thing that brings happiness between friends. I'd take it a kindness if you'd play for her now. Battle planning can wait a little while. We'll not be going into the fight till tomorrow at any rate."
    "I . . . I'll get my baliset," Gurney said. "It's in the passage." He stepped around them and through the hangings.
    Paul put a hand on his mother's arm, found that she was trembling.
    "It's over, Mother," he said.
    Without turning her head, she looked up at him from the corners of her eyes. "Over?" 
    "Of course. Gurney's . . . " 
    "Gurney? Oh . . . yes." She lowered her gaze.
    The hangings rustled as Gurney returned with his baliset. He began tuning it, avoiding their eyes. The hangings on the walls dulled the echoes, making the instrument sound small and intimate.
    Paul led his mother to a cushion, seated her there with her back to the thick draperies of the wall. He was suddenly struck by how old she seemed to him with the beginnings of desert-dried lines in her face, the stretching at the corners of her blue-veiled eyes.
    She's tired, he thought. We must find some way to ease her burdens.
    Gurney strummed a chord.
    Paul glanced at him, said: "I've . . . things that need my attention. Wait here for me."
    Gurney nodded. His mind seemed far away, as though he dwelled for this moment beneath the open skies of Caladan with cloud fleece on the horizon promising rain.
    Paul forced himself to turn away, let himself out through the heavy hangings over the side passage. He heard Gurney take up a tune behind him, and paused a moment outside the room to listen to the muted music.

"Orchards and vineyards, 
And full-breasted houris, 
And a cup overflowing before me. 
Why do I babble of battles, 
And mountains reduced to dust? 
Why do I feel these tears?

Heavens stand open 
And scatter their riches; 
My hands need but gather their wealth.
Why do I think of an ambush, 
And poison in molten cup? 
Why do I feel my years?

Love's arms beckon 
With their naked delights, 
And Eden's promise of ecstasies. 
Why do I remember the scars, 
Dream of old transgressions . . .
And why do I sleep with fears?"

    A robed Fedaykin courier appeared from a corner of the passage ahead of Paul. The man had hood thrown back and fastenings of his stillsuit hanging loose about his neck, proof that he had come just now from the open desert.
    Paul motioned for him to stop, left the hangings of the door and moved down the passage to the courier.
    The man bowed, hands clasped in front of him the way he might greet a Reverend Mother or Sayyadina of the rites. He said: "Muad'Dib, leaders are beginning to arrive for the Council." 
    "So soon?"
    "These are the ones Stilgar sent for earlier when it was thought . . ." He shrugged.
    "I see." Paul glanced back toward the faint sound of the baliset, thinking of the old song that his mother favored -- an odd stretching of happy tune and sad words. "Stilgar will come here soon with others. Show them where my mother waits." 
    "I will wait here, Muad'Dib," the courier said. 
    "Yes . . . yes, do that."
    Paul pressed past the man toward the depths of the cavern, headed for the place that each such cavern had -- a place near its water-holding basin. There would be a small shai-hulud in this place, a creature no more than nine meters long, kept stunted and trapped by surrounding water ditches. The maker, after emerging from its little maker vector, avoided water for the poison it was. And the drowning of a maker was the greatest Fremen secret because it produced the substance of their union -- the Water of Life, the poison that could only be changed by a Reverend Mother.
    The decision had come to Paul while he faced the tension of danger to his mother. No line of the future he had ever seen carried that moment, of peril from Gurney Halleck. The future -- the gray-cloud-future -- with its feeling that the entire universe rolled toward a boiling nexus hung around him like a phantom world.
    I must see it, he thought.
    His body had slowly acquired a certain spice tolerance that made prescient visions fewer and fewer . . . dimmer and dimmer. The solution appeared obvious to him.
    I will drown the maker. We will see now whether I'm the Kwisatz Haderach who can survive the test that the Reverend Mothers have survived.

= = = = = =

And it came to pass in the third year of the Desert War that Paul-Muad'Dib lay alone in the Cave of Birds beneath the kiswa hangings of an inner cell. And he lay as one dead, caught up in the revelation of the Water of Life, his being translated beyond the boundaries of time by the poison that gives life. Thus was the prophecy made true that the Lisan al-Gaib might be both dead and alive.
-"Collected Legends of Arrakis" by the Princess Irulan

    Chani came up out of the Habbanya basin in the predawn darkness, hearing the 'thopter that had brought her from the south go whir-whirring off to a hiding place in the vastness. Around her, the escort kept its distance, fanning out into the rocks of the ridge to probe for dangers -- and giving the mate of Muad'Dib, the mother of his firstborn, the thing she had requested: a moment to walk alone.
    Why did he summon me? she asked herself. He told me before that I must remain in the south with little Leto and Alia.
    She gathered her robe and leaped lightly up across a barrier rock and onto the climbing path that only the desert-trained could recognize in the darkness. Pebbles slithered underfoot and she danced across them without considering the nimbleness required.
    The climb was exhilarating, easing the fears that had fermented in her because of her escort's silent withdrawal and the fact that a precious 'thopter had been sent for her. She felt the inner leaping at the nearness of reunion with Paul-Muad'Dib, her Usul. His name might be a battle cry over all the land: "Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib! Muad'Dib!" But she knew a different man by a different name -- the father of her son, the tender lover.
    A great figure loomed out of the rocks above her, beckoning for speed. She quickened her pace. Dawn birds already were calling and lifting into the sky. A dim spread of light grew across the eastern horizon.
    The figure above was not one of her own escort. Otheym? she wondered, marking a familiarity of movement and manner. She came up to him, recognized in the growing light the broad, flat features of the Fedaykin lieutenant, his hood open and mouth filter loosely fastened the way one did sometimes when venturing out on the desert for only a moment.
    "Hurry," he hissed, and led her down the secret crevasse into the hidden cave. "It will be light soon," he whispered as he held a doorseal open for her. "The Harkonnens have been making desperation patrols over some of this region. We dare not chance discovery now."
    They emerged into the narrow side-passage entrance to the Cave of Birds. Glowglobes came alight. Otheym pressed past her, said: "Follow me. Quickly, now."
    They sped down the passage, through another valve door, another passage and through hangings into what had been the Sayyadina's alcove in the days when this was an overday rest cave. Rugs and cushions now covered the floor. Woven hangings with the red figure of a hawk hid the rock walls. A low field desk at one side was strewn with papers from which lifted the aroma of their spice origin.
    The Reverend Mother sat alone directly opposite the entrance. She looked up with the inward stare that made the uninitiated tremble.
    Otheym pressed palms together, said: "I have brought Chani." He bowed, retreated through the hangings. 
    And Jessica thought: How do I tell Chani? 
    "How is my grandson?" Jessica asked.
    So it's to be the ritual greeting, Chani thought, and her fears returned. Where is Muad'Dib? Why isn't he here to greet me?
    "He is healthy and happy, my mother," Chani said. "I left him with Alia in the care of Harah."
    My mother, Jessica thought. Yes, she has the right to call me that in the formal greeting. She has given me a grandson.
    "I hear a gift of cloth has been sent from Coanua sietch," Jessica said.
    "It is lovely cloth," Chani said. 
    "Does Alia send a message?"
    "No message. But the sietch moves more smoothly now that the people are beginning to accept the miracle of her status." 
    Why does she drag this out so? Chani wondered. Something was so urgent that they sent a 'thopter for me. Now, we drag through the formalities!
    "We must have some of the new cloth cut into garments for little Leto," Jessica said.
    "Whatever you wish, my mother," Chani said. She lowered her gaze. "Is there news of battles?" She held her face expressionless that Jessica might not see the betrayal -- that this was a question about Paul Muad'Dib.
    "New victories," Jessica said. "Rabban has sent cautious overtures about a truce. His messengers have been returned without their water. Rabban has even lightened the burdens of the people in some of the sink villages. But he is too late. "The people know he does it out of fear of us."
    "Thus it goes as Muad'Dib said," Chani said. She stared at Jessica, trying to keep her fears to herself. I have spoken his name, but she has not responded. One cannot see emotion in that glazed stone she calls a face . . . but she is too frozen. Why is she so still? What has happened to my Usul?
    "I wish we were in the south," Jessica said. "The oases were so beautiful when we left. Do you not long for the day when the whole land may blossom thus?"
    "The land is beautiful, true," Chani said. "But there is much grief in it." 
    "Grief is the price of victory," Jessica said.
    Is she preparing me for grief? Chani asked herself. She said: "There are so many women without men. There was jealousy when it was learned that I'd been summoned north." 
    "I summoned you," Jessica said.
    Chani felt her heart hammering. She wanted to clap her hands to her ears, fearful of what they might hear. Still, she kept her voice even: "The message was signed Muad'Dib."
    "I signed it thus in the presence of his lieutenants," Jessica said. "It was a subterfuge of necessity." And Jessica thought: This is a brave woman, my Paul's. She holds to the niceties even when fear is almost overwhelming her. Yes. She may be the one we need now.
    Only the slightest tone of resignation crept into Chani's voice as she said: "Now you may say the thing that must be said." 
    "You were needed here to help me revive Paul," Jessica said. And she thought: There! I said it in the precisely correct way. Revive. Thus she knows Paul is alive and knows there is peril, all in the same word.
    Chani took only a moment to calm herself, then: "What is it I may do?" She wanted to leap at Jessica, shake her and scream: "Take me to him!" But she waited silently for the answer.
    "I suspect," Jessica said, "that the Harkonnens have managed to send an agent among us to poison Paul. It's the only explanation that seems to fit. A most unusual poison. I've examined his blood in the most subtle ways without detecting it."
    Chani thrust herself forward onto her knees. "Poison? Is he in pain? Could I . . . "
    "He is unconscious," Jessica said. "The processes of his life are so low that they can be detected only with the most refined techniques. I shudder to think what could have happened had I not been the one to discover him. He appears dead to the untrained eye." 
    "You have reasons other than courtesy for summoning me," Chani said. "I know you, Reverend Mother. What is it you think I may do that you cannot do?"
    She is brave, lovely and, ah-h-h, so perceptive, Jessica thought. She'd have made a fine Bene Gesserit.
    "Chani," Jessica said, "you may find this difficult to believe, but I do not know precisely why I sent for you. It was an instinct . . . a basic intuition. The thought came unbidden: 'Send for Chani.' " 
    For the first time, Chani saw the sadness in Jessica's expression, the unveiled pain modifying the inward stare.
    "I've done all I know to do," Jessica said. "That all . . . it is so far beyond what is usually supposed as all that you would find difficulty imagining it. Yet . . . I failed."
    "The old companion, Halleck," Chani asked, "is it possible he's a traitor?" 
    "Not Gurney," Jessica said.
    The two words carried an entire conversation, and Chani saw the searching, the tests . . . the memories of old failures that went into this flat denial.
    Chani rocked back onto her feet, stood up, smoothed her desert-stained robe. "Take me to him," she said.
    Jessica arose, turned through hangings on the left wall.
    Chani followed, found herself in what had been a storeroom, its rock walls concealed now beneath heavy draperies. Paul lay on a field pad against the far wall. A single glowglobe above him illuminated his face. A black robe covered him to the chest, leaving his arms outside it stretched along his sides. He appeared to be unclothed under the robe. The skin exposed looked waxen, rigid. There was no visible movement to him.
    Chani suppressed the desire to dash forward, throw herself across him. She found her thoughts, instead, going to her son -- Leto. And she realized in this instant that Jessica once had faced such a moment -- her man threatened by death, forced in her own mind to consider what might be done to save a young son. The realization formed a sudden bond with the older woman so that Chani reached out and clasped Jessica's hand. The answering grip was painful in its intensity.
    "He lives," Jessica said. "I assure you he lives. But the thread of his life is so thin it could easily escape detection. There are some among the leaders already muttering that the mother speaks and not the Reverend Mother, that my son is truly dead and I do not want to give up his water to the tribe."
    "How long has he been this way?" Chani asked. She disengaged her hand from Jessica's, moved farther into the room.
    "Three weeks," Jessica said. "I spent almost a week trying to revive him. There were meetings, arguments . . . investigations. Then I sent for you. The Fedaykin obey my orders, else I might not have been able to delay the . . . " She wet her lips with her tongue, watching Chani cross to Paul.
    Chani stood over him now, looking down on the soft beard of youth that framed his face, tracing with her eyes the high browline, the strong nose, the shuttered eyes -- the features so peaceful in this rigid repose.
    "How does he take nourishment?" Chani asked.
    "The demands of his flesh are so slight he does not yet need food," Jessica said.
    "How many know of what has happened?" Chani asked.
    "Only his closest advisers, a few of the leaders, the Fedaykin and, of course, whoever administered the poison." 
    "There is no clue to the poisoner?" 
    "And it's not for want of investigating," Jessica said. 
    "What do the Fedaykin say?" Chani asked.
    "They believe Paul is in a sacred trance, gathering his holy powers before the final battles. This is a thought I've cultivated." 
    Chani lowered herself to her knees beside the pad, bent close to Paul's face. She sensed an immediate difference in the air about his face . . . but it was only the spice, the ubiquitous spice whose odor permeated everything in Fremen life. Still . . . 
    "You were not born to the spice as we were," Chani said. "Have you investigated the possibility that his body has rebelled against too much spice in his diet?"
    "Allergy reactions are all negative," Jessica said.
    She closed her eyes, as much to blot out this scene as because of sudden realization of fatigue. How long have I been without sleep? she asked herself. Too long.
    "When you change the Water of Life," Chani said, "you do it within yourself by the inward awareness. Have you used this awareness to test his blood?"
    "Normal Fremen blood," Jessica said. "Completely adapted to the diet and the life here."
    Chani sat back on her heels, submerging her fears in thought as she studied Paul's face. This was a trick she had learned from watching the Reverend Mothers. Time could be made to serve the mind. One concentrated the entire attention. 
    Presently, Chani said: "Is there a maker here?" 
    "There are several," Jessica said with a touch of weariness. "We are never without them these days. Each victory requires its blessing. Each ceremony before a raid --"
    "But Paul Muad'Dib has held himself aloof from these ceremonies," Chani said.
    Jessica nodded to herself, remembering her son's ambivalent feelings toward the spice drug and the prescient awareness it precipitated.
    "How did you know this?" Jessica asked. 
    "It is spoken." 
    "Too much is spoken," Jessica said bitterly. 
    "Get me the raw Water of the maker," Chani said.
    Jessica stiffened at the tone of command in Chani's voice, then observed the intense concentration in the younger woman and said: "At once." She went out through the hangings to send a waterman.
    Chani sat staring at Paul. If he has tried to do this, she thought. And it's the sort of thing he might try . . . 
    Jessica knelt beside Chani, holding out a plain camp ewer. The charged odor of the poison was sharp in Chani's nostrils. She dipped a finger in the fluid, held the finger close to Paul's nose.
    The skin along the bridge of his nose wrinkled slightly. Slowly, the nostrils flared. 
    Jessica gasped.
    Chani touched the dampened finger to Paul's upper lip. 
    He drew in a long, sobbing breath. "What is this?" Jessica demanded.
    "Be still," Chani said. "You must convert a small amount of the sacred water. Quickly!"
    Without questioning, because she recognized the tone of awareness in Chani's voice, Jessica lifted the ewer to her mouth, drew in a small sip.
    Paul's eyes flew open. He stared upward at Chani.
    "It is not necessary for her to change the Water," he said. His voice was weak, but steady.
    Jessica, a sip of the fluid on her tongue, found her body rallying, converting the poison almost automatically. In the light elevation the ceremony always imparted, she sensed the life-glow from Paul -- a radiation there registering on her senses. 
    In that instant, she knew.
    "You drank the sacred water!" she blurted. 
    "One drop of it," Paul said. "So small . . . one drop." 
    "How could you do such a foolish thing?" she demanded. 
    "He is your son," Chani said. 
    Jessica glared at her.
    A rare smile, warm and full of understanding, touched Paul's lips. "Hear my beloved," he said. "Listen to her, Mother. She knows." 
    "A thing that others can do, he must do," Chani said.
    "When I had the drop in my mouth, when I felt it and smelled it, when I knew what it was doing to me, then I knew I could do the thing that you have done," he said. "Your Bene Gesserit proctors speak of the Kwisatz Haderach, but they cannot begin to guess the many places I have been. In the few minutes I . . . " He broke off, looking at Chani with a puzzled frown. "Chani? How did you get here? You're supposed to be . . . Why are you here?" 
    He tried to push himself onto his elbows. Chani pressed him back gently.
    "Please, my Usul," she said.
    "I feel so weak," he said. His gaze darted around the room. "How long have I been here?"
    "You've been three weeks in a coma so deep that the spark of life seemed to have fled," Jessica said.
    "But it was . . . I took it just a moment ago and . . . " 
    "A moment for you, three weeks of fear for me," Jessica said.
    "It was only one drop, but I converted it," Paul said. "I changed the Water of Life." And before Chani or Jessica could stop him, he dipped his hand into the ewer they had placed on the floor beside him, and he brought the dripping hand to his mouth, swallowed the palm-cupped liquid.
    "Paul!" Jessica screamed.
    He grabbed her hand, faced her with a death's head grin, and he sent his awareness surging over her.
    The rapport was not as tender, not as sharing, not as encompassing as it had been with Alia and with the Old Reverend Mother in the cavern . . . but it was a rapport: a sense-sharing of the entire being. It shook her, weakened her, and she cowered in her mind, fearful of him.
    Aloud, he said: "You speak of a place where you cannot enter? This place which the Reverend Mother cannot face, show it to me." 
    She shook her head, terrified by the very thought. 
    "Show it to me!" he commanded. 
    "No!"
    But she could not escape him. Bludgeoned by the terrible force of him, she closed her eyes and focused inward -- the-direction-that-is-dark.
    Paul's consciousness flowed through and around her and into the darkness. She glimpsed the place dimly before her mind blanked itself away from the terror. Without knowing why, her whole being trembled at what she had seen -- a region where a wind blew and sparks glared, where rings of light expanded and contracted, where rows of tumescent white shapes flowed over and under and around the lights, driven by darkness and a wind out of nowhere.
    Presently, she opened her eyes, saw Paul staring up at her. He still held her hand, but the terrible rapport was gone. She quieted her trembling. Paul released her hand. It was as though some crutch had been removed. She staggered up and back, would have fallen had not Chani jumped to support her.
    "Reverend Mother!" Chani said. "What is wrong?" 
    "Tired," Jessica whispered. "So . . . tired."
    "Here," Chani said. "Sit here." She helped Jessica to a cushion against the wall.
    The strong young arms felt so good to Jessica. She clung to Chani.
    "He has, in truth, seen the Water of Life?" Chani asked. She disengaged herself from Jessica's grip.
    "He has seen," Jessica whispered. Her mind still rolled and surged from the contact. It was like stepping to solid land after weeks on a heaving sea. She sensed the old Reverend Mother within her . . . and all the others awakened and questioning; "What was that? What happened? Where was that place?"
    Through it all threaded the realization that her son was the Kwisatz Haderach, the one who could be many places at once. He was the fact out of the Bene Gesserit dream. And the fact gave her no peace.
    "What happened?" Chani demanded. 
    Jessica shook her head.
    Paul said: "There is in each of us an ancient force that takes and an ancient force that gives. A man finds little difficulty facing that place within himself where the taking force dwells, but it's almost impossible for him to see into the giving force without changing into something other than man. For a woman, the situation is reversed." 
    Jessica looked up, found Chani was staring at her while listening to Paul.
    "Do you understand me, Mother?" Paul asked. 
    She could only nod.
    "These things are so ancient within us," Paul said, "that they're ground into each separate cell of our bodies. We're shaped by such forces. You can say to yourself, 'Yes, I see how such a thing may be.' But when you look inward and confront the raw force of your own life unshielded, you see your peril. You see that this could overwhelm you. The greatest peril to the Giver is the force that takes. The greatest peril to the Taker is the force that gives. It's as easy to be overwhelmed by giving as by taking." 
    "And you, my son," Jessica asked, "are you one who gives or one who takes?"
    "I'm at the fulcrum," he said. "I cannot give without taking and I cannot take without . . . " He broke off, looking to the wall at his right.
    Chani felt a draft against her cheek, turned to see the hangings close.
    "It was Otheym," Paul said. "He was listening." 
    Accepting the words, Chani was touched by some of the prescience that haunted Paul, and she knew a thing-yet-to-be as though it already had occurred. Otheym would speak of what he had seen and heard. Others would spread the story until it was a fire over the land. Paul-Muad'Dib is not as other men, they would say. There can be no more doubt. He is a man, yet he sees through to the Water of Life in the way of a Reverend Mother. He is indeed the Lisan al-Gaib.
    "You have seen the future, Paul," Jessica said. "Will you say what you've seen?"
    "Not the future," he said. "I've seen the Now." He forced himself to a sitting position, waved Chani aside as she moved to help him. "The Space above Arrakis is filled with the ships of the Guild." 
    Jessica trembled at the certainty in his voice.
    "The Padishah Emperor himself is there," Paul said. He looked at the rock ceiling of his cell. "With his favorite Truthsayer and five legions of Sardaukar. The old Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is there with Thufir Hawat beside him and seven ships jammed with every conscript he could muster. Every Great House has its raiders above us . . . waiting."
    Chani shook her head, unable to look away from Paul. His strangeness, the flat tone of voice, the way he looked through her, filled her with awe.
    Jessica tried to swallow in a dry throat, said: "For what are they waiting?"
    Paul looked at her. "For the Guild's permission to land. The Guild will strand on Arrakis any force that lands without permission." 
    "The Guild's protecting us?" Jessica asked.
    "Protecting us! The Guild itself caused this by spreading tales about what we do here and by reducing troop transport fares to a point where even the poorest Houses are up there now waiting to loot us."
    Jessica noted the lack of bitterness in his tone, wondered at it. She couldn't doubt his words -- they had that same intensity she'd seen in him the night he'd revealed the path of the future that'd taken them among the Fremen.
    Paul took a deep breath, said: "Mother, you must change a quantity of the Water for us. We need the catalyst. Chani, have a scout force sent out . . . to find a pre-spice mass. If we plant a quantity of the Water of Life above a pre-spice mass, do you know what will happen?"
    Jessica weighed his words, suddenly saw through to his meaning. "Paul!" she gasped.
    "The Water of Death," he said. "It'd be a chain reaction." He pointed to the floor. "Spreading death among the little makers, killing a vector of the life cycle that includes the spice and the makers. Arrakis will become a true desolation -- without spice or maker."
    Chani put a hand to her mouth, shocked to numb silence by the blasphemy pouring from Paul's lips.
    "He who can destroy a thing has the real control of it," Paul said. "We can destroy the spice." 
    "What stays the Guild's hand?" Jessica whispered.
    "They're searching for me," Paul said. "Think of that! The finest Guild navigators, men who can quest ahead through time to find the safest course for the fastest Heighliners, all of them seeking me . . .and unable to find me. How they tremble! They know I have their secret here!" Paul held out his cupped hand. "Without the spice they're blind!" 
    Chani found her voice. "You said you see the now!" 
    Paul lay back, searching the spread-out present, its limits extended into the future and into the past, holding onto the awareness with difficulty as the spice illumination began to fade.
    "Go do as I commanded," he said. "The future's becoming as muddled for the Guild as it is for me. The lines of vision are narrowing. Everything focuses here where the spice is . . . where they've dared not interfere before . . . because to interfere was to lose what they must have. But now they're desperate. All paths lead into darkness."

= = = = = =

And that day dawned when Arrakis lay at the hub of the universe with the wheel poised to spin.
-from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    "Will you look at that thing!" Stilgar whispered.
    Paul lay beside him in a slit of rock high on the Shield Wall rim, eye fixed to the collector of a Fremen telescope. The oil lens was focused on a starship lighter exposed by dawn in the basin below them. The tall eastern face of the ship glistened in the flat light of the sun, but the shadow side still showed yellow portholes from glowglobes of the night. Beyond the ship, the city of Arrakeen lay cold and gleaming in the light of the northern sun.
    It wasn't the lighter that excited Stilgar's awe, Paul knew, but the construction for which the lighter was only the centerpost. A single metal hutment, many stories tall, reached out in a thousand-meter circle from the base of the lighter -- a tent composed of interlocking metal leaves -- the temporary lodging place for five legions of Sardaukar and His Imperial Majesty, the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV.
    From his position squatting at Paul's left, Gurney Halleck said: "I count nine levels to it. Must be quite a few Sardaukar in there." 
    "Five legions," Paul said.
    "It grows light," Stilgar hissed. "We like it not, your exposing yourself, Muad'Dib. Let us go back into the rocks now." 
    "I'm perfectly safe here," Paul said.
    "That ship mounts projectile weapons," Gurney said.
    "They believe us protected by shields," Paul said. "They wouldn't waste a shot on an unidentified trio even if they saw us." 
    Paul swung the telescope to scan the far wall of the basin, seeing the pockmarked cliffs, the slides that marked the tombs of so many of his father's troopers. And he had a momentary sense of the fitness of things that the shades of those men should look down on this moment. The Harkonnen forts and towns across the shielded lands lay in Fremen hands or cut away from their source like stalks severed from a plant and left to wither. Only this basin and its city remained to the enemy.
    "They might try a sortie by 'thopter," Stilgar said. "If they see us."
    "Let them," Paul said. "We've 'thopters to burn today . . . and we know a storm is coming."
    He swung the telescope to the far side of the Arrakeen landing field now, to the Harkonnen frigates lined up there with a CHOAM Company banner waving gently from its staff on the ground beneath them. And he thought of the desperation that had forced the Guild to permit these two groups to land while all the others were held in reserve. The Guild was like a man testing the sand with his toe to gauge its temperature before erecting a tent.
    "Is there anything new to see from here?" Gurney asked. "We should be getting under cover. The storm is coming." 
    Paul returned his attention on the giant hutment. "They've even brought their women," he said. "And lackeys and servants. Ah-h-h, my dear Emperor, how confident you are."
    "Men are coming up the secret way," Stilgar said. "It may be Otheym and Korba returning." 
    "All right, Stil," Paul said. "We'll go back." 
    But he took one final look around through the telescope -- studying the plain with its tall ships, the gleaming metal hutment, the silent city, the frigates of the Harkonnen mercenaries. Then he slid backward around a scarp of rock. His place at the telescope was taken by a Fedaykin guardsman.
    Paul emerged into a shallow depression in the Shield Wall's surface. It was a place about thirty meters in diameter and some three meters deep, a natural feature of the rock that the Fremen had hidden beneath a translucent camouflage cover. Communications equipment was clustered around a hole in the wall to the right. Fedaykin guards deployed through the depression waited for Muad'Dib's command to attack.
    Two men emerged from the hole by the communications equipment, spoke to the guards there.
    Paul glanced at Stilgar, nodded in the direction of the two men. "Get their report, Stil." 
    Stilgar moved to obey.
    Paul crouched with his back to the rock, stretching his muscles, straightened. He saw Stilgar sending the two men back into that dark hole in the rock, thought about the long climb down that narrow man-made tunnel to the floor of the basin. 
    Stilgar crossed to Paul.
    "What was so important that they couldn't send a cielago with the message?" Paul asked.
    "They're saving their birds for the battle," Stilgar said. He glanced at the communications equipment, back to Paul. "Even with a tight beam, it is wrong to use those things, Muad'Dib. They can find you by taking a bearing on its emission." 
    "They'll soon be too busy to find me," Paul said. "What did the men report?"
    "Our pet Sardaukar have been released near Old Gap low on the rim and are on their way to their master. The rocket launchers and other projectile weapons are in place. The people are deployed as you ordered. It was all routine."
    Paul glanced across the shallow bowl, studying his men in the filtered light admitted by the camouflage cover. He felt time creeping like an insect working its way across an exposed rock.
    "It'll take our Sardaukar a little time afoot before they can signal a troop carrier," Paul said. 
    "They are being watched?" 
    "They are being watched," Stilgar said.
    Beside Paul, Gurney Halleck cleared his throat. "Hadn't we best be getting to a place of safety?"
    "There is no such place," Paul said. "Is the weather report still favorable?"
    "A great grandmother of a storm coming," Stilgar said. "Can you not feel it, Muad'Dib?"
    "The air does feel chancy," Paul agreed. "But I like the certainty of poling the weather."
    "The storm'll be here in the hour," Stilgar said. He nodded toward the gap that looked out on the Emperor's hutment and the Harkonnen frigates. "They know it there, too. Not a 'thopter in the sky. Everything pulled in and tied down. They've had a report on the weather from their friends in space." 
    "Any more probing sorties?" Paul asked.
    "Nothing since the landing last night," Stilgar said. "They know we're here. I think now they wait to choose their own time." 
    "We choose the time," Paul said.
    Gurney glanced upward, growled: "If they let us." 
    "That fleet'll stay in space," Paul said. 
    Gurney shook his head.
    "They have no choice," Paul said. "We can destroy the spice. The Guild dares not risk that." 
    "Desperate people are the most dangerous," Gurney said. 
    "Are we not desperate?" Stilgar asked. 
    Gurney scowled at him.
    "You haven't lived with the Fremen dream," Paul cautioned. "Stil is thinking of all the water we've spent on bribes, the years of waiting we've added before Arrakis can bloom. He's not --" 
    "Arrrgh," Gurney scowled.
    "Why's he so gloomy?" Stilgar asked.
    "He's always gloomy before a battle," Paul said. "It's the only form of good humor Gurney allows himself."
    A slow, wolfish grin spread across Gurney's face, the teeth showing white above the chip cup of his stillsuit. "It glooms me much to think on all the poor Harkonnen souls we'll dispatch unshriven," he said.
    Stilgar chuckled. "He talks like a Fedaykin."
    "Gurney was born a death commando," Paul said. And he thought: Yes, let them occupy their minds with small talk be fore we test ourselves against that force on the plain. He looked to the gap in the rock wall and back to Gurney, found that the troubadour-warrior had resumed a brooding scowl.
    "Worry saps the strength," Paul murmured. "You told me that once, Gurney."
    "My Duke," Gurney said, "my chief worry is the atomics. If you use them to blast a hole in the Shield Wall . . . " 
    "Those people up there won't use atomics against us," Paul said. "They don't dare . . . and for the same reason that they cannot risk our destroying the source of the spice." 
    "But the injunction against --"
    "The injunction!" Paul barked. "It's fear, not the injunction that keeps the Houses from hurling atomics against each other. The language of the Great Convention is clear enough: 'Use of atomics against humans shall be cause for planetary obliteration.' We're going to blast the Shield Wall, not humans." 
    "It's too fine a point," Gurney said.
    "The hair-splitters up there will welcome any point," Paul said. "Let's talk no more about it."
    He turned away, wishing he actually felt that confident. Presently, he said: "What about the city people? Are they in position yet?" 
    "Yes," Stilgar muttered.
    Paul looked at him. "What's eating you?"
    "I never knew the city man could be trusted completely," Stilgar said.
    "I was a city man myself once," Paul said.
    Stilgar stiffened. His face grew dark with blood. "Muad'Dib knows I did not mean --"
    "I know what you meant, Stil. But the test of a man isn't what you think he'll do. It's what he actually does. These city people have Fremen blood. It's just that they haven't yet learned how to escape their bondage. We'll teach them."
    Stilgar nodded, spoke in a rueful tone: "The habits of a lifetime, Muad'Dib. On the Funeral Plain we learned to despise the men of the communities."
    Paul glanced at Gurney, saw him studying Stilgar. "Tell us, Gurney, why were the city folk down there driven from their homes by the Sardaukar?"
    "An old trick, my Duke. They thought to burden us with refugees."
    "It's been so long since guerrillas were effective that the mighty have forgotten how to fight them," Paul said. "The Sardaukar have played into our hands. They grabbed some city women for their sport, decorated their battle standards with the heads of the men who objected. And they've built up a fever of hate among people who otherwise would've looked on the coming battle as no more than a great inconvenience . . . and the possibility of exchanging one set of masters for another. The Sardaukar recruit for us, Stilgar." 
    "The city people do seem eager," Stilgar said.
    "Their hate is fresh and clear," Paul said. "That's why we use them as shock troops." 
    "The slaughter among them will be fearful," Gurney said. 
    Stilgar nodded agreement.
    "They were told the odds," Paul said. "They know every Sardaukar they kill will be one less for us. You see, gentlemen, they have something to die for. They've discovered they're a people. They're awakening."
    A muttered exclamation came from the watcher at the telescope. Paul moved to the rock slit, asked: "What is it out there?"
    "A great commotion, Muad'Dib," the watcher hissed. "At that monstrous metal tent. A surface car came from Rimwall West and it was like a hawk into a nest of rock partridge." 
    "Our captive Sardaukar have arrived," Paul said.
    "They've a shield around the entire landing field now," the watcher said. "I can see the air dancing even to the edge of the storage yard where they kept the spice."
    "Now they know who it is they fight," Gurney said. "Let the Harkonnen beasts tremble and fret themselves that an Atreides yet lives!"
    Paul spoke to the Fedaykin at the telescope. "Watch the flagpole atop the Emperor's ship. If my flag is raised there --" 
    "It will not be," Gurney said.
    Paul saw the puzzled frown on Stilgar's face, said: "If the Emperor recognized my claim, he'll signal by restoring the Atreides flag to Arrakis. We'll use the second plan then, move only against the Harkonnens. The Sardaukar will stand aside and let us settle the issue between ourselves."
    "I've no experience with these offworld things," Stilgar said. "I've heard of them, but it seems unlikely the --" 
    "You don't need experience to know what they'll do," Gurney said.
    "They're sending a new flag up on the tall ship," the watcher said. "The flag is yellow . . . with a black and red circle in the center."
    "There's a subtle piece of business," Paul said. "The CHOAM Company flag."
    "It's the same as the flag at the other ships," the Fedaykin guard said.
    "I don't understand," Stilgar said.
    "A subtle piece of business indeed," Gurney said. "Had he sent up the Atreides banner, he'd have had to live by what that meant. Too many observers about. He could've signaled with the Harkonnen flag on his staff -- a flat declaration that'd have been. But, no -- he sends up the CHOAM rag. He's telling the people up there . . . " Gurney pointed toward space. " . . . where the profit is. He's saying he doesn't care if it's an Atreides here or not." 
    "How long till the storm strikes the Shield Wall?" Paul asked.
    Stilgar turned away, consulted one of the Fedaykin in the bowl. Presently, he returned, said: "Very soon, Muad'Dib. Sooner than we expected. It's a great-great-grandmother of a storm . . . perhaps even more than you wished."
    "It's my storm," Paul said, and saw the silent awe on the faces of the Fedaykin who heard him. "Though it shook the entire world it could not be more than I wished. Will it strike the Shield Wall full on?" 
    "Close enough to make no difference," Stilgar said.
    A courier crossed from the hole that led down into the basin, said: "The Sardaukar and Harkonnen patrols are pulling back, Muad'Dib."
    "They expect the storm to spill too much sand into the basin for good visibility," Stilgar Said. "They think we'll be in the same fix."
    "Tell our gunners to set their sights well before visibility drops," Paul said. "They must knock the nose off every one of those ships as soon as the storm has destroyed the shields." He stepped to the wall of the bowl, pulled back a fold of the camouflage cover and looked up at the sky. The horsetail twistings of blow sand could be seen against the dark of the sky. Paul restored the cover, said: "Start sending our men down, Stil." 
    "Will you not go with us?" Stilgar asked. 
    "I'll wait here a bit with the Fedaykin," Paul said.
    Stilgar gave a knowing shrug toward Gurney, moved to the hole in the rock wall, was lost in its shadows.
    "The trigger that blasts the Shield Wall aside, that I leave in your hands, Gurney," Paul said. "You will do it?" 
    "I'll do it."
    Paul gestured to a Fedaykin lieutenant, said: "Otheym, start moving the check patrols out of the blast area. They must be out of there before the storm strikes." 
    The man bowed, followed Stilgar.
    Gurney leaned in to the rock slit, spoke to the man at the telescope: "Keep your attention on the south wall. It'll be completely undefended until we blow it."
    "Dispatch a cielago with a time signal," Paul ordered.
    "Some ground cars are moving toward the south wall," the man at the telescope said. "Some are using projectile weapons, testing. Our people are using body shields as you commanded. The ground cars have stopped."
    In the abrupt silence, Paul heard the wind devils playing overhead -- the front of the storm. Sand began to drift down into their bowl through gaps in the cover. A burst of wind caught the cover, whipped it away.
    Paul motioned his Fedaykin to take shelter, crossed to the men at the communications equipment near the tunnel mouth. Gurney stayed beside him. Paul crouched over the signalmen.
    One said: "A great-great-great grandmother of a storm, Muad'Dib."
    Paul glanced up at the darkening sky, said: "Gurney, have the south wall observers pulled out." He had to repeat his order, shouting above the growing noise of the storm. 
    Gurney turned to obey.
    Paul fastened his face filter, tightened the stillsuit hood. 
    Gurney returned.
    Paul touched his shoulder, pointed to the blast trigger set into the tunnel mouth beyond the signalmen. Gurney went into the tunnel, stopped there, one hand at the trigger, his gaze on Paul.
    "We are getting no messages," the signalman beside Paul said. "Much static."
    Paul nodded, kept his eye on the time-standard dial in front of the signalman. Presently, Paul looked at Gurney, raised a hand, returned his attention to the dial. The time counter crawled around its final circuit.
    "Now!" Paul shouted, and dropped his hand. 
    Gurney depressed the blast trigger.
    It seemed that a full second passed before they felt the ground beneath them ripple and shake. A rumbling sound was added to the storm's roar.
    The Fedaykin watcher from the telescope appeared beside Paul, the telescope clutched under one arm. "The Shield Wall is breached, Muad'Dib!" he shouted. "The storm is on them and our gunners already are firing."
    Paul thought of the storm sweeping across the basin, the static charge within the wall of sand that destroyed every shield barrier in the enemy camp.
    "The storm!" someone shouted. "We must get under cover, Muad'Dib!"
    Paul came to his senses, feeling the sand needles sting his exposed cheeks. We are committed, he thought. He put an arm around the signalman's shoulder, said: "Leave the equipment! There's more in the tunnel." He felt himself being pulled away, Fedaykin pressed around him to protect him. They squeezed into the tunnel mouth, feeling its comparative silence, turned a corner into a small chamber with glowglobes overhead and another tunnel opening beyond.
    Another signalman sat there at his equipment. 
    "Much static," the man said.
    A swirl of sand filled the air around them.
    "Seal off this tunnel!" Paul shouted. A sudden pressure of stillness showed that his command had been obeyed. "Is the way down to the basin still open?" Paul asked.
    A Fedaykin went to look, returned, said: "The explosion caused a little rock to fall, but the engineers say it is still open. They're cleaning up with lasbeams."
    "Tell them to use their hands!" Paul barked. "There are shields active down there?"
    "They are being careful, Muad'Dib," the man said, but he turned to obey.
    The signalmen from outside pressed past them carrying their equipment.
    "I told those men to leave their equipment!" Paul said.
    "Fremen do not like to abandon equipment, Muad'Dib," one of his Fedaykin chided.
    "Men are more important than equipment now," Paul said. "We'll have more equipment than we can use soon or have no need for any equipment."
    Gurney Halleck came up beside him, said: "I heard them say the way down is open. We're very close to the surface here, m'Lord, should the Harkonnens try to retaliate in kind."
    "They're in no position to retaliate," Paul said. "They're just now finding out that they have no shields and are unable to get off Arrakis."
    "The new command post is all prepared, though, m'Lord," Gurney said.
    "They've no need of me in the command post yet," Paul said. "The plan would go ahead without me. We must wait for the --" 
    "I'm getting a message, Muad'Dib," said the signalman at the communications equipment. The man shook his head, pressed a receiver phone against his ear. "Much static!" He began scribbling on a pad in front of him, shaking his head waiting, writing . . . waiting.
    Paul crossed to the signalman's side. The Fedaykin stepped back, giving him room. He looked down at what the man had written, read:
    "Raid . . . on Sietch Tabr . . . captives . . . Alia (blank) families of (blank) dead are . . . they (blank) son of Muad'Dib . . . " 
    Again, the signalman shook his head. 
    Paul looked up to see Gurney staring at him.
    "The message is garbled," Gurney said. "The static. You don't know that . . . "
    "My son is dead," Paul said, and knew as he spoke that it was true. "My son is dead . . . and Alia is a captive . . . hostage." He felt emptied, a shell without emotions. Everything he touched brought death and grief. And it was like a disease that could spread across the universe.
    He could feel the old-man wisdom, the accumulation out of the experiences from countless possible lives. Something seemed to chuckle and rub its hands within him.
    And Paul thought: How little the universe knows about the nature of real cruelty!

= = = = = =

And Muad'Dib stood before them, and he said: "Though we deem the captive dead, yet does she live. For her seed is my seed and her voice is my voice. And she sees unto the farthest reaches of possibility. Yea, unto the vale of the unknowable does she see because of me."
-from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen stood with eyes downcast in the Imperial audience chamber, the oval selamlik within the Padishah Emperor's hutment. With covert glances, the Baron had studied the metal-walled room and its occupants -- the noukkers, the pages, the guards, the troop of House Sardaukar drawn up around the walls, standing at ease there beneath the bloody and tattered captured battle flags that were the room's only decoration.
    Voices sounded from the right of the chamber, echoing out of a high passage: "Make way! Make way for the Royal Person!" 
    The Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV came out of the passage into the audience chamber followed by his suite. He stood waiting while his throne was brought, ignoring the Baron, seemingly ignoring every person in the room.
    The Baron found that he could not ignore the Royal Person, and studied the Emperor for a sign, any clue to the purpose of this audience. The Emperor stood poised, waiting -- a slim, elegant figure in a gray Sardaukar uniform with silver and gold trim. His thin face and cold eyes reminded the Baron of the Duke Leto long dead. There was that same look of the predatory bird. But the Emperor's hair was red, not black, and most of that hair was concealed by a Burseg's ebon helmet with the Imperial crest in gold upon its crown.
    Pages brought the throne. It was a massive chair carved from a single piece of Hagal quartz -- blue-green translucency shot through with streaks of yellow fire. They placed it on the dais and the Emperor mounted, seated himself.
    An old woman in a black aba robe with hood drawn down over her forehead detached herself from the Emperor's suite, took up station behind the throne, one scrawny hand resting on the quartz back. Her face peered out of the hood like a witch caricature -- sunken cheeks and eyes, an overlong nose, skin mottled and with protruding veins.
    The Baron stilled his trembling at sight of her. The presence of the Reverend Mother Gains Helen Mohiam, the Emperor's Truthsayer, betrayed the importance of this audience. The Baron looked away from her, studied the suite for a clue. There were two of the Guild agents, one tall and fat, one short and fat, both with bland gray eyes. And among the lackeys stood one of the Emperor's daughters, the Princess Irulan, a woman they said was being trained in the deepest of the Bene Gesserit ways, destined to be a Reverend Mother. She was tall, blonde, face of chiseled beauty, green eyes that looked past and through him. 
    "My dear Baron."
    The Emperor had deigned to notice him. The voice was baritone and with exquisite control. It managed to dismiss him while greeting him.
    The Baron bowed low, advanced to the required position ten paces from the dais. "I came at your summons, Majesty." 
    "Summons!" the old witch cackled.
    "Now, Reverend Mother," the Emperor chided, but he smiled at the Baron's discomfiture, said: "First, you will tell me where you've sent your minion, Thufir Hawat."
    The Baron darted his gaze left and right, reviled himself for coming here without his own guards, not that they'd be much use against Sardaukar. Still . . .
    "Well?" the Emperor said.
    "He has been gone these five days, Majesty." The Baron shot a glance at the Guild agents, back to the Emperor. "He was to land at a smuggler base and attempt infiltrating the camp of the Fremen fanatic, this Muad'Dib." 
    "Incredible!" the Emperor said.
    One of the witch's clawlike hands tapped the Emperor's shoulder. She leaned forward, whispered in his ear.
    The Emperor nodded, said: "Five days, Baron. Tell me, why aren't you worried about his absence?"
    "But I am worried, Majesty!"
    The Emperor continued to stare at him, waiting. The Reverend Mother emitted a cackling laugh.
    "What I mean, Majesty," the Baron said, "is that Hawat will be dead within another few hours, anyway." And he explained about the latent poison and need for an antidote.
    "How clever of you, Baron," the Emperor said. "And where are your nephews, Rabban and the young Feyd-Rautha?" 
    "The storm comes, Majesty. I sent them to inspect our perimeter lest the Fremen attack under cover of the sand."
    "Perimeter," the Emperor said. The word came out as though it puckered his mouth. "The storm won't be much here in the basin, and that Fremen rabble won't attack while I'm here with five legions of Sardaukar."
    "Surely not, Majesty," the Baron said, "But error on the side of caution cannot be censured."
    "Ah-h-h-h," the Emperor said. "Censure. Then I'm not to speak of how much time this Arrakis nonsense has taken from me? Nor the CHOAM Company profits pouring down this rat hole? Nor the court functions and affairs of state I've had to delay -- even cancel -- because of this stupid affair?"
    The Baron lowered his gaze, frightened by the Imperial anger. The delicacy of his position here, alone and dependent upon the Convention and the dictum familia of the Great Houses, fretted him. Does he mean to kill me? the Baron asked himself. He couldn't! Not with the other Great Houses waiting up there, aching for any excuse to gain from this upset on Arrakis. 
    "Have you taken hostages?" the Emperor asked.
    "It's useless, Majesty," the Baron said. "These mad Fremen hold a burial ceremony for every captive and act as though such a one were already dead." 
    "So?" the Emperor said.
    And the Baron waited, glancing left and right at the metal walls of the selamlik, thinking of the monstrous fanmetal tent around him. Such unlimited wealth it represented that even the Baron was awed. He brings pages, the Baron thought, and useless court lackeys, his women and their companions -- hair-dressers, designers, everything . . . all the fringe parasites of the Court. All here -- fawning, slyly plotting, "roughing it" with the Emperor . . . here to watch him put an end to this affair, to make epigrams over the battles and idolize the wounded.
    "Perhaps you've never sought the right kind of hostages," the Emperor said.
    He knows something, the Baron thought. Fear sat like a stone in his stomach until he could hardly bear the thought of eating. Yet, the feeling was like hunger, and he poised himself several times in his suspensors on the point of ordering food brought to him. But there was no one here to obey his summons.
    "Do you have any idea who this Muad'Dib could be?" the Emperor asked.
    "One of the Umma, surely," the Baron said. "A Fremen fanatic, a religious adventurer. They crop up regularly on the fringes of civilization. Your Majesty knows this."
    The Emperor glanced at his Truthsayer, turned back to scowl at the Baron. "And you have no other knowledge of this Muad'Dib?" 
    "A madman," the Baron said. "But all Fremen are a little mad." 
    "Mad?"
    "His people scream his name as they leap into battle. The women throw their babies at us and hurl themselves onto our knives to open a wedge for their men to attack us. They have no . . . no . . . decency!"
    "As bad as that," the Emperor murmured, and his tone of derision did not escape the Baron. "Tell me, my dear Baron, have you investigated the southern polar regions of Arrakis?" 
    The Baron stared up at the Emperor, shocked by the change of subject. "But . . . well, you know, Your Majesty, the entire region is uninhabitable, open to wind and worm. There's not even any spice in those latitudes."
    "You've had no reports from spice lighters that patches of greenery appear there?"
    "There've always been such reports. Some were investigated -- long ago. A few plants were seen. Many 'thopters were lost. Much too costly, Your Majesty. It's a place where men cannot survive for long."
    "So," the Emperor said. He snapped his fingers and a door opened at his left behind the throne. Through the door came two Sardaukar herding a girl-child who appeared to be about four years old. She wore a black aba, the hood thrown back to reveal the attachments of a stillsuit hanging free at her throat. Her eyes were Fremen blue, staring out of a soft, round face. She appeared completely unafraid and there was a look to her stare that made the Baron feel uneasy for no reason he could explain.
    Even the old Bene Gesserit Truthsayer drew back as the child passed and made a warding sign in her direction. The old witch obviously was shaken by the child's presence.
    The Emperor cleared his throat to speak, but the child spoke first -- a thin voice with traces of a soft-palate lisp, but clear nonetheless. "So here he is," she said. She advanced to the edge of the dais. "He doesn't appear much, does he -- one frightened old fat man too weak to support his own flesh without the help of suspensors."
    It was such a totally unexpected statement from the mouth of a child that the Baron stared at her, speechless in spite of his anger. Is it a midget? he asked himself.
    "My dear Baron," the Emperor said, "become acquainted with the sister of Muad'Dib."
    "The sist . . . "The Baron shifted his attention to the Emperor. "I do not understand."
    "I, too, sometimes err on the side of caution," the Emperor said. "It has been reported to me that your uninhabited south polar regions exhibit evidence of human activity."
    "But that's impossible!" the Baron protested. "The worms . . . there's sand clear to the . . . "
    "These people seem able to avoid the worms," the Emperor said.
    The child sat down on the dais beside the throne, dangled her feet over the edge, kicking them. There was such an air of sureness in the way she appraised her surroundings.
    The Baron stared at the kicking feet, the way they moved the black robe, the wink of sandals beneath the fabric.
    "Unfortunately," the Emperor said, "I only sent in five troop carriers with a light attack force to pick up prisoners for questioning. We barely got away with three prisoners and one carrier. Mind you, Baron, my Sardaukar were almost overwhelmed by a force composed mostly of women, children, and old men. This child here was in command of one of the attacking groups."
    "You see, Your Majesty!" the Baron said. "You see how they are!"
    "I allowed myself to be captured," the child said. "I did not want to face my brother and have to tell him that his son had been killed."
    "Only a handful of our men got away," the Emperor said. "Got away! You hear that?"
    "We'd have had them, too," the child said, "except for the flames."
    "My Sardaukar used the attitudinal jets on their carrier as flame-throwers," the Emperor said. "A move of desperation and the only thing that got them away with their three prisoners. Mark that, my dear Baron: Sardaukar forced to retreat in confusion from women and children and old men!"
    "We must attack in force," the Baron rasped. "We must destroy every last vestige of --"
    "Silence!" the Emperor roared. He pushed himself forward on his throne. "Do not abuse my intelligence any longer. You stand there in your foolish innocence and --" 
    "Majesty," the old Truthsayer said.
    He waved her to silence. "You say you don't know about the activity we found, nor the fighting qualities of these superb people!" The Emperor lifted himself half off his throne. "What do you take me for, Baron?"
    The Baron took two backward steps, thinking: It was Rabban. He has done this to me. Rabban has . . . 
    "And this fake dispute with Duke Leto," the Emperor purred, sinking back into his throne. "How beautifully you maneuvered it." 
    "Majesty," the Baron pleaded. "What are you --" 
    "Silence!"
    The old Bene Gesserit put a hand on the Emperor's shoulder, leaned close to whisper in his ear.
    The child seated on the dais stopped kicking her feet, said: "Make him afraid some more, Shaddam. I shouldn't enjoy this, but I find the pleasure impossible to suppress."
    "Quiet, child," the Emperor said. He leaned forward, put a hand on her head, stared at the Baron. "Is it possible, Baron? Could you be as simpleminded as my Truthsayer suggests? Do you not recognize this child, daughter of your ally, Duke Leto?" 
    "My father was never his ally," the child said. "My father is dead and this old Harkonnen beast has never seen me before." 
    The Baron was reduced to stupefied glaring. When he found his voice it was only to rasp: "Who?"
    "I am Alia, daughter of Duke Leto and the Lady Jessica, sister of Duke Paul-Muad'Dib," the child said. She pushed herself off the dais, dropped to the floor of the audience chamber. "My brother has promised to have your head atop his battle standard and I think he shall."
    "Be hush, child," the Emperor said, and he sank back into his throne, hand to chin, studying the Baron.
    "I do not take the Emperor's orders," Alia said. She turned, looked up at the old Reverend Mother. "She knows." 
    The Emperor glanced up at his Truthsayer. "What does she mean?"
    "That child is an abomination!" the old woman said. "Her mother deserves a punishment greater than anything in history. Death! It cannot come too quickly for that child or for the one who spawned her!" The old woman pointed a finger at Alia. "Get out of my mind!"
    "T-P?" the Emperor whispered. He snapped his attention back to Alia. "By the Great Mother!"
    "You don't understand. Majesty," the old woman said. "Not telepathy. She's in my mind. She's like the ones before me, the ones who gave me their memories. She stands in my mind! She cannot be there, but she is!"
    "What others?" the Emperor demanded. "What's this nonsense?"
    The old woman straightened, lowered her pointing hand. "I've said too much, but the fact remains that this child who is not a child must be destroyed. Long were we warned against such a one and how to prevent such a birth, but one of our own has betrayed us." 
    "You babble, old woman," Alia said. "You don't know how it was, yet you rattle on like a purblind fool." Alia closed her eyes, took a deep breath, and held it.
    The old Reverend Mother groaned and staggered.
    Alia opened her eyes. "That is how it was," she said. "A cosmic accident . . . and you played your part in it."
    The Reverend Mother held out both hands, palms pushing the air toward Alia.
    "What is happening here?" the Emperor demanded. "Child, can you truly project your thoughts into the mind of another?" 
    "That's not how it is at all," Alia said. "Unless I'm born as you, I cannot think as you."
    "Kill her," the old woman muttered, and clutched the back of the throne for support. "Kill her!" The sunken old eyes glared at Alia.
    "Silence," the Emperor said, and he studied Alia. "Child, can you communicate with your brother?" 
    "My brother knows I'm here," Alia said.
    "Can you tell him to surrender as the price of your life?" 
    Alia smiled up at him with clear innocence. "I shall not do that," she said.
    The Baron stumbled forward to stand beside Alia. "Majesty," he pleaded, "I knew nothing of --"
    "Interrupt me once more, Baron," the Emperor said, "and you will lose the powers of interruption . . . forever." He kept his attention focused on Alia, studying her through slitted lids. "You will not, eh? Can you read in my mind what I'll do if you disobey me?"
    "I've already said I cannot read minds," she said, "but one doesn't need telepathy to read your intentions."
    The Emperor scowled. "Child, your cause is hopeless. I have but to rally my forces and reduce this planet to --"
    "It's not that simple," Alia said. She looked at the two Guildsmen. "Ask them."
    "It is not wise to go against my desires," the Emperor said. "You should not deny me the least thing."
    "My brother comes now," Alia said. "Even an Emperor may tremble before Muad'Dib, for he has the strength of righteousness and heaven smiles upon him."
    The Emperor surged to his feet. "This play has gone far enough. I will take your brother and this planet and grind them to --" 
    The room rumbled and shook around them. There came a sudden cascade of sand behind the throne where the hutment was coupled to the Emperor's ship. The abrupt flicker-tightening of skin pressure told of a wide-area shield being activated. 
    "I told you," Alia said. "My brother comes." 
    The Emperor stood in front of his throne, right hand pressed to right ear, the servo-receiver there chattering its report on the situation. The Baron moved two steps behind Alia. Sardaukar were leaping to positions at the doors.
    "We will fall back into space and reform," the Emperor said. "Baron, my apologies. These madmen are attacking under cover of the storm. We will show them an Emperor's wrath, then." He pointed at Alia. "Give her body to the storm."
    As he spoke, Alia fled backward, feigning terror: "Let the storm have what it can take!" she screamed. And she backed into the Baron's arms.
    "I have her, Majesty!" the Baron shouted. "Shall I dispatch her now-eeeeeeeeeeeh!" He hurled her to the floor, clutched his left arm.
    "I'm sorry, Grandfather," Alia said. "You've met the Atreides gom jabbar." She got to her feet, dropped a dark needle from her hand.
    The Baron fell back. His eyes bulged as he stared at a red slash on his left palm. "You . . . you . . . " He rolled sideways in his suspensors, a sagging mass of flesh supported inches off the floor with head lolling and mouth hanging open.
    "These people are insane," the Emperor snarled. "Quick! Into the ship. We'll purge this planet of every . . . "
    Something sparkled to his left. A roll of ball lightning bounced away from the wall there, crackled as it touched the metal floor. The smell of burned insulation swept through the selamlik.
    "The shield!" one of the Sardaukar officers shouted. "The outer shield is down! They . . . "
    His words were drowned in a metallic roaring as the shipwall behind the Emperor trembled and rocked.
    "They've shot the nose off our ship!" someone called.
    Dust boiled through the room. Under its cover, Alia leaped up, ran toward the outer door.
    The Emperor whirled, motioned his people into an emergency door that swung open in the ship's side behind the throne. He flashed a hand signal to a Sardaukar officer leaping through the dust haze. "We will make our stand here!" the Emperor ordered.
    Another crash shook the hutment. The double doors banged open at the far side of the chamber admitting wind-blown sand and the sound of shouting. A small, black-robed figure could be seen momentarily against the light -- Alia darting out to find a knife and, as befitted her Fremen training, to kill Harkonnen and Sardaukar wounded. House Sardaukar charged through a greened yellow haze toward the opening, weapons ready, forming an arc there to protect the Emperor's retreat.
    "Save yourself, Sire!" a Sardaukar officer shouted. "Into the ship!"
    But the Emperor stood alone now on his dais pointing toward the doors. A forty-meter section of the hutment had been blasted away there and the selamlik's doors opened now onto drifting sand. A dust cloud hung low over the outside world blowing from pastel distances. Static lightning crackled from the cloud and the spark flashes of shields being shorted out by the storm's charge could be seen through the haze. The plain surged with figures in combat -- Sardaukar and leaping gyrating robed men who seemed to come down out of the storm.
    All this was as a frame for the target of the Emperor's pointing hand.
    Out of the sand haze came an orderly mass of flashing shapes -- great rising curves with crystal spokes that resolved into the gaping mouths of sandworms, a massed wall of them, each with troops of Fremen riding to the attack. They came in a hissing wedge, robes whipping in the wind as they cut through the melee on the plain.
    Onward toward the Emperor's hutment they came while the House Sardaukar stood awed for the first time in their history by an onslaught their minds found difficult to accept.
    But the figures leaping from the worm backs were men, and the blades flashing in that ominous yellow light were a thing the Sardaukar had been trained to face. They threw themselves into combat. And it was man to man on the plain of Arrakeen while a picked Sardaukar bodyguard pressed the Emperor back into the ship, sealed the door on him, and prepared to die at that door as part of his shield.
    In the shock of comparative silence within the ship, the Emperor stared at the wide-eyed faces of his suite, seeing his oldest daughter with the flush of exertion on her cheeks, the old Truthsayer standing like a black shadow with her hood pulled about her face, finding at last the faces he sought -- the two Guildsmen. They wore the Guild gray, unadorned, and it seemed to fit the calm they maintained despite the high emotions around them.
    The taller of the two, though, held a hand to his left eye. As the Emperor watched, someone jostled the Guildsman's arm, the hand moved, and the eye was revealed. The man had lost one of his masking contact lenses, and the eye stared out a total blue so dark as to be almost black.
    The smaller of the pair elbowed his way a step nearer the Emperor, said: "We cannot know how it will go." And the taller companion, hand restored to eye, added in a cold voice: "But this Muad'Dib cannot know, either."
    The words shocked the Emperor out of his daze. He checked the scorn on his tongue by a visible effort because it did not take a Guild navigator's single-minded focus on the main chance to see the immediate future out on that plain. Were these two so dependent upon their faculty that they had lost the use of their eyes and their reason? he wondered.
    "Reverend Mother," he said, "we must devise a plan." 
    She pulled the hood from her face, met his gaze with an unblinking stare. The look that passed between them carried complete understanding. They had one weapon left and both knew it: treachery.
    "Summon Count Fenring from his quarters," the Reverend Mother said.
    The Padishah Emperor nodded, waved for one of his aides to obey that command.

= = = = = =

He was warrior and mystic, ogre and saint, the fox and the innocent, chivalrous, ruthless, less than a god, more than a man. There is no measuring Muad'Dib's motives by ordinary standards. In the moment of his triumph, he saw the death prepared for him, yet he accepted the treachery. Can you say he did this out of a sense of justice? Whose justice, then? Remember, we speak now of the Muad'Dib who ordered battle drums made from his enemies' skins, the Muad'Dib who denied the conventions of his ducal past with a wave of the hand, saying merely: "I am the Kwisatz Haderach. That is reason enough. "
-from "Arrakis Awakening" by the Princess Irulan

    It was to the Arrakeen governor's mansion, the old Residency the Atreides had first occupied on Dune, that they escorted Paul-Muad'Dib on the evening of his victory. The building stood as Rabban had restored it, virtually untouched by the fighting although there had been looting by townspeople. Some of the furnishings in the main hall had been overturned or smashed.
    Paul strode through the main entrance with Gurney Halleck and Stilgar a pace behind. Their escort fanned out into the Great Hall, straightening the place and clearing an area for Muad'Dib. One squad began investigating that no sly trap had been planted here.
    "I remember the day we first came here with your father," Gurney said. He glanced around at the beams and the high, slitted windows. "I didn't like this place then and I like it less now. One of our caves would be safer."
    "Spoken like a true Fremen," Stilgar said, and he marked the cold smile that his words brought to Muad'Dib's lips. "Will you reconsider, Muad'Dib?"
    "This place is a symbol," Paul said. "Rabban lived here. By occupying this place I seal my victory for all to understand. Send men through the building. Touch nothing. Just be certain no Harkonnen people or toys remain."
    "As you command," Stilgar said, and reluctance was heavy in his tone as he turned to obey.
    Communications men hurried into the room with their equipment, began setting up near the massive fireplace. The Fremen guard that augmented the surviving Fedaykin took up stations around the room. There was muttering among them, much darting of suspicious glances. This had been too long a place of the enemy for them to accept their presence in it casually.
    "Gurney, have an escort bring my mother and Chani," Paul said. "Does Chani know yet about our son?" 
    "The message was sent, m'Lord." 
    "Are the makers being taken out of the basin yet?" 
    "Yes, m'Lord. The storm's almost spent." 
    "What's the extent of the storm damage?" Paul asked.
    "In the direct path -- on the landing field and across the spice storage yards of the plain -- extensive damage," Gurney said. "As much from battle as from the storm." 
    "Nothing money won't repair, I presume," Paul said.
    "Except for the lives, m'Lord," Gurney said, and there was a tone of reproach in his voice as though to say: "When did an Atreides worry first about things when people were at stake?" 
    But Paul could only focus his attention on the inner eye and the gaps visible to him in the time-wall that still lay across his path. Through each gap the jihad raged away down the corridors of the future.
    He sighed, crossed the hall, seeing a chair against the wall. The chair had once stood in the dining hall and might even have held his own father. At the moment, though, it was only an object to rest his weariness and conceal it from the men. He sat down, pulling his robes around his legs, loosening his stillsuit at the neck.
    "The Emperor is still holed up in the remains of his ship," Gurney said.
    "For now, contain him there," Paul said. "Have they found the Harkonnens yet?" 
    "They're still examining the dead."
    "What reply from the ships up there?" He jerked his chin toward the ceiling.
    "No reply yet, m'Lord."
    Paul sighed, resting against the back of his chair. Presently, he said: "Bring me a captive Sardaukar. We must send a message to our Emperor, It's time to discuss terms." 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    Gurney turned away, dropped a hand signal to one of the Fedaykin who took up close-guard position beside Paul.
    "Gurney," Paul whispered. "Since we've been rejoined I've yet to hear you produce the proper quotation for the event." He turned, saw Gurney swallow, saw the sudden grim hardening of the man's jaw.
    "As you wish, m'Lord," Gurney said. He cleared his throat, rasped: " 'And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.' "
    Paul closed his eyes, forcing grief out of his mind, letting it wait as he had once waited to mourn his father. Now, he gave his thoughts over to this day's accumulated discoveries -- the mixed futures and the hidden presence of Alia within his awareness.
    Of all the uses of time-vision, this was the strangest. "I have breasted the future to place my words where only you can hear them," Alia had said. "Even you cannot do that, my brother. I find it an interesting play. And . . . oh, yes -- I've killed our grandfather, the demented old Baron. He had very little pain." 
    Silence. His time sense had seen her withdrawal. 
    "Muad'Dib."
    Paul opened his eyes to see Stilgar's black-bearded visage above him, the dark eyes glaring with battle light.
    "You've found the body of the old Baron," Paul said.
    A hush of the person settled over Stilgar. "How could you know?" he whispered. "We just found the body in that great pile of metal the Emperor built."
    Paul ignored the question, seeing Gurney return accompanied by two Fremen who supported a captive Sardaukar.
    "Here's one of them, m'Lord," Gurney said. He signed to the guard to hold the captive five paces in front of Paul.
    The Sardaukar's eyes, Paul noted, carried a glazed expression of shock. A blue bruise stretched from the bridge of his nose to the corner of his mouth. He was of the blond, chisel-featured caste, the look that seemed synonymous with rank among the Sardaukar, yet there were no insignia on his torn uniform except the gold buttons with the Imperial crest and the tattered braid of his trousers. 
    "I think this one's an officer, m'Lord," Gurney said.
    Paul nodded, said: "I am the Duke Paul Atreides. Do you understand that, man?" 
    The Sardaukar stared at him unmoving.
    "Speak up," Paul said, "or your Emperor may die." 
    The man blinked, swallowed. 
    "Who am I?" Paul demanded.
    "You are the Duke Paul Atreides," the man husked.
    He seemed too submissive to Paul, but then the Sardaukar had never been prepared for such happenings as this day. They'd never known anything but victory which, Paul realized, could be a weakness in itself. He put that thought aside for later consideration in his own training program.
    "I have a message for you to carry to the Emperor," Paul said. And he couched his words in the ancient formula: "I, a Duke of a Great House, an Imperial Kinsman, give my word of bond under the Convention. If the Emperor and his people lay down their arms and come to me here I will guard their lives with my own." Paul held up his left hand with the ducal signet for the Sardaukar to see. "I swear it by this." 
    The man wet his lips with his tongue, glanced at Gurney.
    "Yes," Paul said. "Who but an Atreides could command the allegiance of Gurney Halleck." 
    "I will carry the message," the Sardaukar said.
    "Take him to our forward command post and send him in," Paul said.
    "Yes, m'Lord." Gurney motioned for the guard to obey, led them out.
    Paul turned back to Stilgar.
    "Chani and your mother have arrived," Stilgar said. "Chani has asked time to be alone with her grief. The Reverend Mother sought a moment in the weirding room; I know not why." 
    "My mother's sick with longing for a planet she may never see," Paul said. "Where water falls from the sky and plants grow so thickly you cannot walk between them." 
    "Water from the sky," Stilgar whispered.
    In that instant, Paul saw how Stilgar had been transformed from the Fremen naib to a creature of the Lisan al-Gaib, a receptacle for awe and obedience. It was a lessening of the man, and Paul felt the ghost-wind of the jihad in it.
    I have seen a friend become a worshiper, he thought.
    In a rush of loneliness, Paul glanced around the room, noting how proper and on-review his guards had become in his presence. He sensed the subtle, prideful competition among them -- each hoping for notice from Muad'Dib.
    Muad'Dib from whom all blessings flow, he thought, and it was the bitterest thought of his life. They sense that I must take the throne, he thought. But they cannot know I do it to prevent the jihad. 
    Stilgar cleared his throat, said: "Rabban, too, is dead." 
    Paul nodded.
    Guards to the right suddenly snapped aside, standing at attention to open an aisle for Jessica. She wore her black aba and walked with a hint of striding across sand, but Paul noted how this house had restored to her something of what she had once been here -- concubine to a ruling duke. Her presence carried some of its old assertiveness.
    Jessica stopped in front of Paul, looked down at him. She saw his fatigue and how he hid it, but found no compassion for him. It was as though she had been rendered incapable of any emotion for her son.
    Jessica had entered the Great Hall wondering why the place refused to fit itself snugly in to her memories. It remained a foreign room, as though she had never walked here, never walked here with her beloved Leto, never confronted a drunken Duncan Idaho here -- never, never, never . . . 
    There should be a word-tension directly opposite to adab, the demanding memory, she thought. There should be a word for memories that deny themselves. 
    "Where is Alia?" she asked.
    "Out doing what any good Fremen child should be doing in such times," Paul said. "She's killing enemy wounded and marking their bodies for the water-recovery teams." 
    "Paul!"
    "You must understand that she does this out of kindness," he said. "Isn't it odd how we misunderstand the hidden unity of kindness and cruelty?"
    Jessica glared at her son, shocked by the profound change in him. Was it his child's death did this? she wondered. And she said: "The men tell strange stories of you, Paul. They say you've all the powers of the legend -- nothing can be hidden from you, that you see where others cannot see." 
    "A Bene Gesserit should ask about legends?" he asked.
    "I've had a hand in whatever you are," she admitted, "but you mustn't expect me to --"
    "How would you like to live billions upon billions of lives?" Paul asked. "There's a fabric of legends for you! Think of all those experiences, the wisdom they'd bring. But wisdom tempers love, doesn't it? And it puts a new shape on hate. How can you tell what's ruthless unless you've plumbed the depths of both cruelty and kindness? You should fear me, Mother. I am the Kwisatz Haderach."
    Jessica tried to swallow in a dry throat. Presently, she said; "Once you denied to me that you were the Kwisatz Haderach." 
    Paul shook his head. "I can deny nothing any more." He looked up into her eyes. "The Emperor and his people come now. They will be announced any moment. Stand beside me. I wish a clear view of them. My future bride will be among them." 
    "Paul!" Jessica snapped. "Don't make the mistake your father made!"
    "She's a princess," Paul said. "She's my key to the throne, and that's all she'll ever be. Mistake? You think because I'm what you made me that I cannot feel the need for revenge?" 
    "Even on the innocent?" she asked, and she thought: He must not make the mistakes I made.
    "There are no innocent any more," Paul said.
    "Tell that to Chani," Jessica said, and gestured toward the passage from the rear of the Residency.
    Chani entered the Great Hall there, walking between the Fremen guards as though unaware of them. Her hood and stillsuit cap were thrown back, face mask fastened aside. She walked with a fragile uncertainty as she crossed the room to stand beside Jessica.
    Paul saw the marks of tears on her cheeks -- She gives water to the dead. He felt a pang of grief strike through him, but it was as though he could only feel this thing through Chani's presence. 
    "He is dead, beloved," Chani said. "Our son is dead." 
    Holding himself under stiff control, Paul got to his feet. He reached out, touched Chani's cheek, feeling the dampness of her tears. "He cannot be replaced," Paul said, "but there will be other sons. It is Usul who promises this." Gently, he moved her aside, gestured to Stilgar.
    "Muad'Dib," Stilgar said.
    "They come from the ship, the Emperor and his people," Paul said. "I will stand here. Assemble the captives in an open space in, the center of the room. They will be kept at a distance of ten meters from me unless I command otherwise." 
    "As you command, Muad'Dib."
    As Stilgar turned to obey, Paul heard the awed muttering of Fremen guards: "You see? He knew! No one told him, but he knew!"
    The Emperor's entourage could be heard approaching now, his Sardaukar humming one of their marching tunes to keep up their spirits. There came a murmur of voices at the entrance and Gurney Halleck passed through the guard, crossed to confer with Stilgar, then moved to Paul's side, a strange look in His eyes.
    Will I lose Gurney, too? Paul wondered. The way I lost Stilgar -- losing a friend to gain a creature?
    "They have no throwing weapons," Gurney said. "I've made sure of that myself." He glanced around the room, seeing Paul's preparations. "Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen is with them. Shall I cut him out?" 
    "Leave him."
    "There're some Guild people, too, demanding special privileges, threatening an embargo against Arrakis. I told them I'd give you their message." 
    "Let them threaten."
    "Paul!" Jessica hissed behind him. "He's talking about the Guild!" 
    "I'll pull their fangs presently," Paul said.
    And he thought then about the Guild -- the force that had specialized for so long that it had become a parasite, unable to exist independently of the life upon which it fed. They had never dared grasp the sword . . . and now they could not grasp it. They might have taken Arrakis when they realized the error of specializing on the melange awareness-spectrum narcotic for their navigators. They could have done this, lived their glorious day and died. Instead, they'd existed from moment to moment, hoping the seas in which they swam might produce a new host when the old one died.
    The Guild navigators, gifted with limited prescience, had made the fatal decision: they'd chosen always the clear, safe course that leads ever downward into stagnation.
    Let them look closely at their new host, Paul thought.
    "There's also a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother who says she's a friend of your mother," Gurney said. 
    "My mother has no Bene Gesserit friends."
    Again, Gurney glanced around the Great Hall, then bent close to Paul's ear. "Thufir Hawat's with 'em, m'Lord. I had no chance to see him alone, but he used our old hand signs to say he's been working with the Harkonnens, thought you were dead. Says he's to be left among 'em." 
    "You left Thufir among those --"
    "He wanted it . . . and I thought it best. If . . . there's something wrong, he's where we can control him. If not -- we've an ear on the other side."
    Paul thought then of prescient glimpses into the possibilities of this moment -- and one time-line where Thufir carried a poisoned needle which the Emperor commanded he use against "this upstart Duke."
    The entrance guards stepped aside, formed a short corridor of lances. There came a murmurous swish of garments, feet rasping the sand that had drifted into the Residency.
    The Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV led his people into the hall. His burseg helmet had been lost and the red hair stood out in disarray. His uniform's left sleeve had been ripped along the inner seam. He was beltless and without weapons, but his presence moved with him like a force-shield bubble that kept his immediate area open.
    A Fremen lance dropped across his path, stopped him where Paul had ordered. The others bunched up behind, a montage of color, of shuffling and of staring faces.
    Paul swept his gaze across the group, saw women who hid signs of weeping, saw the lackeys who had come to enjoy grandstand seats at a Sardaukar victory and now stood choked to silence by defeat. Paul saw the bird-bright eyes of the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam glaring beneath her black hood, and beside her the narrow furtiveness of Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen. 
    There's a face time betrayed to me, Paul thought.
    He looked beyond Feyd-Rautha then, attracted by a movement, seeing there a narrow, weaselish face he'd never before encountered -- not in time or out of it. It was a face he felt he should know and the feeling carried with it a marker of fear. 
    Why should I fear that man? he wondered.
    He leaned toward his mother, whispered: "That man to the left of the Reverend Mother, the evil-looking one -- who is that?" 
    Jessica looked, recognizing the face from her Duke's dossiers. "Count Fenring," she said. "The one who was here immediately before us. A genetic-eunuch . . . and a killer."
    The Emperor's errand boy, Paul thought. And the thought was a shock crashing across his consciousness because he had seen the Emperor in uncounted associations spread through the possible futures--but never once had Count Fenring appeared within those prescient visions.
    It occurred to Paul then that he had seen his own dead body along countless reaches of the time web, but never once had he seen his moment of death.
    Have I been denied a glimpse of this man because he is the one who kills me? Paul wondered.
    The thought sent a pang of foreboding through him. He forced his attention away from Fenring, looked now at the remnants of Sardaukar men and officers, the bitterness on their faces and the desperation. Here and there among them, faces caught Paul's attention briefly: Sardaukar officers measuring the preparations within this room, planning and scheming yet for a way to turn defeat into victory.
    Paul's attention came at last to a tall blonde woman, green-eyed, a face of patrician beauty, classic in its hauteur, untouched by tears, completely undefeated. Without being told it, Paul knew her -- Princess Royal, Bene Gesserit -- trained, a face that time vision had shown him in many aspects: Irulan. 
    There's my key, he thought.
    Then he saw movement in the clustered people, a face and figure emerged -- Thufir Hawat, the seamed old features with darkly stained lips, the hunched shoulders, the look of fragile age about him.
    "There's Thufir Hawat," Paul said. "Let him stand free, Gurney." 
    "M'Lord," Gurney said.
    "Let him stand free," Paul repeated. 
    Gurney nodded.
    Hawat shambled forward as a Fremen lance was lifted and replaced behind him. The rheumy eyes peered at Paul, measuring, seeking.
    Paul stepped forward one pace, sensed the tense, waiting movement of the Emperor and his people.
    Hawat's gaze stabbed past Paul, and the old man said: "Lady Jessica, I but learned this day how I've wronged you in my thoughts. You needn't forgive." 
    Paul waited, but his mother remained silent.
    "Thufir, old friend," Paul said, "as you can see, my back is toward no door." 
    "The universe is full of doors," Hawat said. 
    "Am I my father's son?" Paul asked.
    "More like your grandfather's," Hawat rasped. "You've his manner and the look of him in your eyes."
    "Yet I'm my father's son," Paul said. "For I say to you, Thufir, that in payment for your years of service to my family you may now ask anything you wish of me. Anything at all. Do you need my life now, Thufir? It is yours." Paul stepped forward a pace, hands at his side, seeing the look of awareness grow in Hawat's eyes. 
    He realizes that I know of the treachery, Paul thought.
    Pitching his voice to carry in a half-whisper for Hawat's ears alone, Paul said: "I mean this, Thufir. If you're to strike me, do it now."
    "I but wanted to stand before you once more, my Duke," Hawat said. And Paul became aware for the first time of the effort the old man exerted to keep from falling. Paul reached out, supported Hawat by the shoulders, feeling the muscle tremors beneath his hands.
    "Is there pain, old friend?" Paul asked.
    "There is pain, my Duke," Hawat agreed, "but the pleasure is greater." He half turned in Paul's arms, extended his left hand, palm up, toward the Emperor, exposing the tiny needle cupped against the fingers. "See, Majesty?" he called. "See your traitor's needle? Did you think that I who've given my life to service of the Atreides would give them less now?"
    Paul staggered as the old man sagged in his arms, felt the death there, the utter flaccidity. Gently, Paul lowered Hawat to the floor, straightened and signed for guardsmen to carry the body away.
    Silence held the hall while his command was obeyed.
    A look of deadly waiting held the Emperor's face now. Eyes that had never admitted fear admitted it at last.
    "Majesty," Paul said, and noted the jerk of surprised attention in the tall Princess Royal. The words had been uttered with the Bene Gesserit controlled atonals, carrying in it every shade of contempt and scorn that Paul could put there. 
    Bene-Gesserit trained indeed, Paul thought.
    The Emperor cleared his throat, said: "Perhaps my respected kinsman believes he has things all his own way now. Nothing could be more remote from fact. You have violated the Convention, used atomics against --"
    "I used atomics against a natural feature of the desert," Paul said. "It was in my way and I was in a hurry to get to you, Majesty, to ask your explanation for some of your strange activities." 
    "There's a massed armada of the Great Houses in space over Arrakis right now," the Emperor said. "I've but to say the word and they'll --"
    "Oh, yes," Paul said, "I almost forgot about them." He searched through the Emperor's suite until he saw the faces of the two Guildsmen, spoke aside to Gurney. "Are those the Guild agents, Gurney, the two fat ones dressed in gray over there?" 
    "Yes, m'Lord."
    "You two," Paul said, pointing. "Get out of there immediately and dispatch messages that will get that fleet on its way home. After this, you'll ask my permission before --"
    "The Guild doesn't take your orders!" the taller of the two barked. He and his companion pushed through to the barrier lances, which were raised at a nod from Paul. The two men stepped out and the taller leveled an arm at Paul, said: "You may very well be under embargo for your --"
    "If I hear any more nonsense from either of you," Paul said, "I'll give the order that'll destroy all spice production on Arrakis . . . forever."
    "Are you mad?" the tall Guildsman demanded. He fell back half a step.
    "You grant that I have the power to do this thing, then?" Paul asked.
    The Guildsman seemed to stare into space for a moment, then: "Yes, you could do it, but you must not."
    "Ah-h-h," Paul said and nodded to himself. "Guild navigators, both of you, eh?" 
    "Yes!"
    The shorter of the pair said: "You would blind yourself, too, and condemn us all to slow death. Have you any idea what it means to be deprived of the spice liquor once you're addicted?" 
    "The eye that looks ahead to the safe course is closed forever," Paul said. "The Guild is crippled. Humans become little isolated clusters on their isolated planets. You know, I might do this thing out of pure spite . . . or out of ennui."
    "Let us talk this over privately," the taller Guildsman said. "I'm sure we can come to some compromise that is --" 
    "Send the message to your people over Arrakis," Paul said. "I grow tired of this argument. If that fleet over us doesn't leave soon there'll be no need for us to talk." He nodded toward his communications men at the side of the hall. "You may use our equipment."
    "First we must discuss this," the tall Guildsman said. "We cannot just --"
    "Do it!" Paul barked. "The power to destroy a thing is the absolute control over it. You've agreed I have that power. We are not here to discuss or to negotiate or to compromise. You will obey my orders or suffer the immediate consequences!" 
    "He means it," the shorter Guildsman said. And Paul saw the fear grip them.
    Slowly the two crossed to the Fremen communications equipment.
    "Will they obey?" Gurney asked.
    "They have a narrow vision of time," Paul said. "They can see ahead to a blank wall marking the consequences of disobedience. Every Guild navigator on every ship over us can look ahead to that same wall. They'll obey."
    Paul turned back to look at the Emperor, said: "When they permitted you to mount your father's throne, it was only on the assurance that you'd keep the spice flowing. You've failed them, Majesty. Do you know the consequences?" 
    "Nobody permitted me to --"
    "Stop playing the fool," Paul barked. "The Guild is like a village beside a river. They need the water, but can only dip out what they require. They cannot dam the river and control it, because that focuses attention on what they take, it brings down eventual destruction. The spice flow, that's their river, and I have built a dam. But my dam is such that you cannot destroy it without destroying the river."
    The Emperor brushed a hand through his red hair, glanced at the backs of the two Guildsmen.
    "Even your Bene Gesserit Truthsayer is trembling," Paul said. "There are other poisons the Reverend Mothers can use for their tricks, but once they've used the spice liquor, the others no longer work."
    The old woman pulled her shapeless black robes around her, pressed forward out of the crowd to stand at the barrier lances.
    "Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam," Paul said. "It has been a long time since Caladan, hasn't it?"
    She looked past him at his mother, said: "Well, Jessica, I see that your son is indeed the one. For that you can be forgiven even the abomination of your daughter."
    Paul stilled a cold, piercing anger, said: "You've never had the right or cause to forgive my mother anything!" 
    The old woman locked eyes with him.
    "Try your tricks on me, old witch," Paul said. "Where's your gom jabbar? Try looking into that place where you dare not look! You'll find me there staring out at you!" 
    The old woman dropped her gaze. 
    "Have you nothing to say?" Paul demanded.
    "I welcomed you to the ranks of humans," she muttered. "Don't besmirch that."
    Paul raised his voice: "Observe her, comrades! This is a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother, patient in a patient cause. She could wait with her sisters -- ninety generations for the proper combination of genes and environment to produce the one person their schemes required. Observe her! She knows now that the ninety generations have produced that person. Here I stand . . . but . . . I . . . will . . . never . . . do . . . her . . . bidding!" 
    "Jessica!" the old woman screamed. "Silence him!"
    "Silence him yourself," Jessica said.
    Paul glared at the old woman. "For your part in all this I could gladly have you strangled," he said. "You couldn't prevent it!" he snapped as she stiffened in rage. "But I think it better punishment that you live out your years never able to touch me or bend me to a single thing your scheming desires." 
    "Jessica, what have you done?" the old woman demanded.
    "I'll give you only one thing," Paul said. "You saw part of what the race needs, but how poorly you saw it. You think to control human breeding and intermix a select few according to your master plan! How little you understand of what --" 
    "You mustn't speak of these things!" the old woman hissed.
    "Silence!" Paul roared. The word seemed to take substance as it twisted through the air between them under Paul's control.
    The old woman reeled back into the arms of those behind her, face blank with shock at the power with which he had seized her psyche. "Jessica, "she whispered. "Jessica."
    "I remember your gom jabbar," Paul said. "You remember mine. I can kill you with a word."
    The Fremen around the ball glanced knowingly at each other. Did the legend not say: "And his word shall carry death eternal to those who stand against righteousness."
    Paul turned his attention to the tall Princess Royal standing beside her Emperor father. Keeping his eyes focused on her, he said: "Majesty, we both know the way out of our difficulty." 
    The Emperor glanced at his daughter, back to Paul. "You dare? You! An adventurer without family, a nobody from --" 
    "You've already admitted who I am," Paul said. "Royal kinsman, you said. Let's stop this nonsense."
    "I am your ruler," the Emperor said.
    Paul glanced at the Guildsmen standing now at the communications equipment and facing him. One of them nodded. 
    "I could force it," Paul said.
    "You will not dare!" the Emperor grated. 
    Paul merely stared at him.
    The Princess Royal put a hand on her father's arm. "Father," she said, and her voice was silky soft, soothing.
    "Don't try your tricks on me," the Emperor said. He looked at her. "You don't need to do this, Daughter. We've other resources that --" 
    "But here's a man fit to be your son," she said.
    The old Reverend Mother, her composure regained, forced her way to the Emperor's side, leaned close to his ear and whispered.
    "She pleads your case," Jessica said.
    Paul continued to look at the golden-haired Princess. Aside to his mother, he said: "That's Irulan, the oldest, isn't it?" 
    "Yes."
    Chani moved up on Paul's other side, said: "Do you wish me to leave, Muad'Dib?" 
    He glanced at her. "Leave? You'll never again leave my side." 
    "There's nothing binding between us," Chani said.
    Paul looked down at her for a silent moment, then: "Speak only truth with me, my Sihaya." As she started to reply, he silenced her with a finger to her lips. "That which binds us cannot be loosed," he said. "Now, watch these matters closely for I wish to see this room later through your wisdom."
    The Emperor and his Truthsayer were carrying on a heated, low-voiced argument.
    Paul spoke to his mother: "She reminds him that it's part of their agreement to place a Bene Gesserit on the throne, and Irulan is the one they've groomed for it." 
    "Was that their plan?" Jessica said. 
    "Isn't it obvious?" Paul asked.
    "I see the signs!" Jessica snapped. "My question was meant to remind you that you should not try to teach me those matters in which I instructed you." 
    Paul glanced at her, caught a cold smile on her lips.
    Gurney Halleck leaned between them, said: "I remind you, m'Lord, that there's a Harkonnen in that bunch." He nodded toward the dark-haired Feyd-Rautha pressed against a barrier lance on the left. "The one with the squinting eyes there on the left. As evil a face as I ever say. You promised me once that --" 
    "Thank you, Gurney," Paul said.
    "It's the na-Baron . . . Baron now that the old man's dead," Gurney said. "He'll do for what I've in --" 
    "Can you take him, Gurney?" "M'Lord jests!"
    "That argument between the Emperor and his witch has gone on long enough, don't you think, Mother?" 
    She nodded. "Indeed."
    Paul raised his voice, called out to the Emperor: "Majesty, is there a Harkonnen among you?"
    Royal disdain revealed itself in the way the Emperor turned to look at Paul. "I believe my entourage has been placed under the protection of your ducal word," he said.
    "My question was for information only," Paul said. "I wish to know if a Harkonnen is officially a part of your entourage or if a Harkonnen is merely hiding behind a technicality out of cowardice."
    The Emperor's smile was calculating. "Anyone accepted into the Imperial company is a member of my entourage." 
    "You have the word of a Duke," Paul said, "but Muad'Dib is another matter. He may not recognize your definition of what constitutes an entourage. My friend Gurney Halleck wishes to kill a Harkonnen. If he --"
    "Kanly!" Feyd-Rautha shouted. He pressed against the barrier lance. "Your father named this vendetta, Atreides. You call me coward while you hide among your women and offer to send a lackey against me!"
    The old Truthsayer whispered something fiercely into the Emperor's ear, but he pushed her aside, said: "Kanly, is it? There are strict rules for kanly." 
    "Paul, put a stop to this," Jessica said.
    "M'Lord," Gurney said, "You promised me my day against the Harkonnens."
    "You've had your day against them," Paul said and he felt a harlequin abandon take over his emotions. He slipped his robe and hood from his shoulders, handed them to his mother with his belt and crysknife, began unstrapping his stillsuit. He sensed now that the universe focused on this moment.
    "There's no need for this," Jessica said. "There are easier ways, Paul."
    Paul stepped out of his stillsuit, slipped the crysknife from its sheath in his mother's hand. "I know," he said. "Poison, an assassin, all the old familiar ways."
    "You promised me a Harkonnen!" Gurney hissed, and Paul marked the rage in the man's face, the way the inkvine scar stood out dark and ridged. "You owe it to me, m'Lord!" 
    "Have you suffered more from them than I?" Paul asked. 
    "My sister," Gurney rasped. "My years in the slave pits --"
    "My father," Paul said. "My good friends and companions, Thufir Hawat and Duncan Idaho, my years as a fugitive without rank or succor . . . and one more thing: it is now kanly and you know as well as I the rules that must prevail."
    Halleck's shoulders sagged. "M'Lord, if that swine . . . he's no more than a beast you'd spurn with your foot and discard the shoe because it'd been contaminated. Call in an executioner, if you must, or let me do it, but don't offer yourself to --"
    "Muad'Dib need not do this thing," Chani said.
    He glanced at her, saw the fear for him in her eyes. "But the Duke Paul must," he said.
    "This is a Harkonnen animal!" Gurney rasped.
    Paul hesitated on the point of revealing his own Harkonnen ancestry, stopped at a sharp look from his mother, said merely: "But this being has human shape, Gurney, and deserves human doubt." 
    Gurney said: "If he so much as --"
    "Please stand aside," Paul said. He hefted the crysknife, pushed Gurney gently aside.
    "Gurney!" Jessica said. She touched Gurney's arm. "He's like his grandfather in this mood. Don't distract him. It's the only thing you can do for him now." And she thought: Great Mother! What irony.
    The Emperor was studying Feyd-Rautha, seeing the heavy shoulders, the thick muscles. He turned to look at Paul -- a stringy whipcord of a youth, not as desiccated as the Arrakeen natives, but with ribs there to count, and sunken in the flanks so that the ripple and gather of muscles could be followed under the skin.
    Jessica leaned close to Paul, pitched her voice for his ears alone: "One thing, Son. Sometimes a dangerous person is prepared by the Bene Gesserit, a word implanted into the deepest recesses by the old pleasure-pain methods. The word-sound most frequently used is Uroshnor. If this one's been prepared, as I strongly suspect, that word uttered in his ear will render his muscles flaccid and --" 
    "I want no special advantage for this one," Paul said. "Step back out of my way."
    Gurney spoke to her: "Why is he doing this? Does he think to get himself killed and achieve martyrdom? This Fremen religious prattle, is that what clouds his reason?"
    Jessica hid her face in her hands, realizing that she did not know fully why Paul took this course. She could feel death in the room and knew that the changed Paul was capable of such a thing as Gurney suggested. Every talent within her focused on the need to protect her son, but there was nothing she could do. 
    "Is it this religious prattle?" Gurney insisted. 
    "Be silent," Jessica whispered. "And pray."
    The Emperor's face was touched by an abrupt smile. "If Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen . . . of my entourage . . . so wishes," he said, "I relieve him of all restraint and give him freedom to choose his own course in this." The Emperor waved a hand toward Paul's Fedaykin guards. "One of your rabble has my belt and short blade. If Feyd-Rautha wishes it, he may meet you with my blade in his hand."
    "I wish it," Feyd-Rautha said, and Paul saw the elation on the man's face.
    He's overconfident, Paul thought. There's a natural advantage I can accept.
    "Get the Emperor's blade," Paul said, and watched as his command was obeyed. "Put it on the floor there." He indicated a place with his foot. "Clear the Imperial rabble back against the wall and let the Harkonnen stand clear."
    A flurry of robes, scraping of feet, low-voiced commands and protests accompanied obedience to Paul's command. The Guildsmen remained standing near the communications equipment. They frowned at Paul in obvious indecision.
    They're accustomed to seeing the future, Paul thought. In this place and time they're blind . . . even as I am. And he sampled the time-winds, sensing the turmoil, the storm nexus that now focused on this moment place. Even the faint gaps were closed now. Here was the unborn jihad, he knew. Here was the race consciousness that he had known once as his own terrible purpose. Here was reason enough for a Kwisatz Haderach or a Lisan al-Gaib or even the halting schemes of the Bene Gesserit. The race of humans had felt its own dormancy, sensed itself grown stale and knew now only the need to experience turmoil in which the genes would mingle and the strong new mixtures survive. All humans were alive as an unconscious single organism in this moment, experiencing a kind of sexual heat that could override any barrier.
    And Paul saw how futile were any efforts of his to change any smallest bit of this. He had thought to oppose the jihad within himself, but the jihad would be. His legions would rage out from Arrakis even without him. They needed only the legend he already had become. He had shown them the way, given them mastery even over the Guild which must have the spice to exist.
    A sense of failure pervaded him, and he saw through it that Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen had slipped out of the torn uniform, stripped down to a fighting girdle with a mail core.
    This is the climax, Paul thought. From here, the future will open, the clouds part onto a kind of glory. And if I die here, they'll say I sacrificed myself that my spirit might lead them. And if I live, they'll say nothing can oppose Muad'Dib.
    "Is the Atreides ready?" Feyd-Rautha called, using the words of the ancient kanly ritual.
    Paul chose to answer him in the Fremen way: "May thy knife chip and shatter!" He pointed to the Emperor's blade on the floor, indicating that Feyd-Rautha should advance and take it.
    Keeping his attention on Paul, Feyd-Rautha picked up the knife, balancing it a moment in his hand to get the feel of it. Excitement kindled in him. This was a fight he had dreamed about -- man against man, skill against skill with no shields intervening. He could see a way to power opening before him because the Emperor surely would reward whoever killed this troublesome duke. The reward might even be that haughty daughter and a share of the throne. And this yokel duke, this back-world adventurer could not possibly be a match for a Harkonnen trained in every device and every treachery by a thousand arena combats. And the yokel had no way of knowing he faced more weapons than a knife here.
    Let us see if you're proof against poison! Feyd-Rautha thought. He saluted Paul with the Emperor's blade, said: "Meet your death, fool."
    "Shall we fight, cousin?" Paul asked. And he cat-footed forward, eyes on the waiting blade, his body crouched low with his own milk-white crysknife pointing out as though an extension of his arm.
    They circled each other, bare feet grating on the floor, watching with eyes intent for the slightest opening. 
    "How beautifully you dance," Feyd-Rautha said.
    He's a talker, Paul thought. There's another weakness. He grows uneasy in the face of silence.
    "Have you been shriven?" Feyd-Rautha asked. 
    Still, Paul circled in silence.
    And the old Reverend Mother, watching the fight from the press of the Emperor's suite, felt herself trembling. The Atreides youth had called the Harkonnen cousin. It could only mean he knew the ancestry they shared, easy to understand because he was the Kwisatz Haderach. But the words forced her to focus on the only thing that mattered to her here.
    This could be a major catastrophe for the Bene Gesserit breeding scheme.
    She had seen something of what Paul had seen here, that Feyd-Rautha might kill but not be victorious. Another thought, though, almost overwhelmed her. Two end products of this long and costly program faced each other in a fight to the death that might easily claim both of them. If both died here that would leave only Feyd-Rautha's bastard daughter, still a baby, an unknown, an unmeasured factor, and Alia, the abomination.
    "Perhaps you have only pagan rites here," Feyd-Rautha said. "Would you like the Emperor's Truthsayer to prepare your spirit for its journey?"
    Paul smiled, circling to the right, alert, his black thoughts suppressed by the needs of the moment.
    Feyd-Rautha leaped, feinting with right hand, but with the knife shifted in a blur to his left hand.
    Paul dodged easily, noting the shield-conditioned hesitation in Feyd-Rautha's thrust. Still, it was not as great a shield conditioning as some Paul had seen, and he sensed that Feyd-Rautha had fought before against unshielded foes.
    "Does an Atreides run or stand and fight?" Feyd-Rautha asked.
    Paul resumed his silent circling. Idaho's words came back to him, the words of training from the long-ago practice floor on Caladan: "Use the first moments in study. You may miss many an opportunity for quick victory this way, but the moments of study are insurance of success. Take your time and be sure."
    "Perhaps you think this dance prolongs your life a few moments," Feyd-Rautha said. "Well and good." He stopped the circling, straightened.
    Paul had seen enough for a first approximation. Feyd-Rautha led to the left side, presenting the right hip as though the mailed fighting girdle could protect his entire side. It was the action of a man trained to the shield and with a knife in both hands.
    Or . . . And Paul hesitated . . . the girdle was more than it seemed.
    The Harkonnen appeared too confident against a man who'd this day led the forces of victory against Sardaukar legions.
    Feyd-Rautha noted the hesitation, said: "Why prolong the inevitable? You but keep me from exercising my rights over this ball of dirt."
    If it's a flip-dart, Paul thought, it's a cunning one. The girdle shows no signs of tampering.
    "Why don't you speak?" Feyd-Rautha demanded.
    Paul resumed his probing circle, allowing himself a cold smile at the tone of unease in Feyd-Rautha's voice, evidence that the pressure of silence was building.
    "You smile, eh?" Feyd-Rautha asked. And he leaped in mid-sentence.
    Expecting the slight hesitation, Paul almost failed to evade the downflash of blade, felt its tip scratch his left arm. He silenced the sudden pain there, his mind flooded with realization that the earlier hesitation had been a trick -- an overfeint. Here was more of an opponent than he had expected. There would be tricks within tricks within tricks.
    "Your own Thufir Hawat taught me some of my skills," Feyd-Rautha said. "He gave me first blood. Too bad the old fool didn't live to see it."
    And Paul recalled that Idaho had once said, "Expect only what happens in the fight. That way you'll never be surprised." 
    Again the two circled each other, crouched, cautious.
    Paul saw the return of elation to his opponent, wondered at it. Did a scratch signify that much to the man? Unless there were poison on the blade! But how could there be? His own men had handled the weapon, snooped it before passing it. They were too well trained to miss an obvious thing like that.
    "That woman you were talking to over there," Feyd-Rautha said. "The little one. Is she something special to you? A pet perhaps? Will she deserve my special attentions?" 
    Paul remained silent, probing with his inner senses, examining the blood from the wound, finding a trace of soporific from the Emperor's blade. He realigned his own metabolism to match this threat and change the molecules of the soporific, but he felt a thrill of doubt. They'd been prepared with soporific on a blade. A soporific. Nothing to alert a poison snooper, but strong enough to slow the muscles it touched. His enemies had their own plans within plans, their own stacked treacheries. 
    Again Feyd-Rautha leaped, stabbing.
    Paul, the smile frozen on his face, feinted with slowness as though inhibited by the drug and at the last instant dodged to meet the downflashing arm on the crysknife's point.
    Feyd-Rautha ducked sideways and was out and away, his blade shifted to his left hand, and the measure of him that only a slight paleness of jaw betrayed the acid pain where Paul had cut him.
    Let him know his own moment of doubt, Paul thought. Let him suspect poison.
    "Treachery!" Feyd-Rautha shouted. "He's poisoned me! I do feel poison in my arm!"
    Paul dropped his cloak of silence, said: "Only a little acid to counter the soporific on the Emperor's blade."
    Feyd-Rautha matched Paul's cold smile, lifted blade in left hand for a mock salute. His eyes glared rage behind the knife.
    Paul shifted his crysknife to his left hand, matching his opponent. Again, they circled, probing.
    Feyd-Rautha began closing the space between them, edging in, knife held high, anger showing itself in squint of eye and set of jaw. He feinted right and under, and they were pressed against each other, knife hands gripped, straining.
    Paul, cautious of Feyd-Rautha's right hip where he suspected a poison flip-dart, forced the turn to the right. He almost failed to see the needlepoint flick out beneath the belt line. A shift and a giving in Feyd-Rautha's motion warned him. The tiny point missed Paul's flesh by the barest fraction. 
    On the left hip!
    Treachery within treachery within treachery, Paul reminded himself. Using Bene Gesserit-trained muscles, he sagged to catch a reflex in Feyd-Rautha, but the necessity of avoiding the tiny point jutting from his opponent's hip threw Paul off just enough that he missed his footing and found himself thrown hard to the floor, Feyd-Rautha on top.
    "You see it there on my hip?" Feyd-Rautha whispered. "Your death, fool." And he began twisting himself around, forcing the poisoned needle closer and closer. "It'll stop your muscles and my knife will finish you. There'll be never a trace left to detect!"
    Paul strained, hearing the silent screams in his mind, his cell-stamped ancestors demanding that he use the secret word to slow Feyd-Rautha, to save himself. 
    "I will not say it!" Paul gasped.
    Feyd-Rautha gaped at him, caught in the merest fraction of hesitation. It was enough for Paul to find the weakness of balance in one of his opponent's leg muscles, and their positions were reversed. Feyd-Rautha lay partly underneath with right hip high, unable to turn because of the tiny needlepoint caught against the floor beneath him.
    Paul twisted his left hand free, aided by the lubrication of blood from his arm, thrust once hard up underneath Feyd-Rautha's jaw. The point slid home into the brain. Feyd-Rautha jerked and sagged back, still held partly on his side by the needle imbedded in the floor.
    Breathing deeply to restore his calm, Paul pushed himself away and got to his feet. He stood over the body, knife in hand, raised his eyes with deliberate slowness to look across the room at the Emperor.
    "Majesty," Paul said, "your force is reduced by one more. Shall we now shed sham and pretense? Shall we now discuss what must be? Your daughter wed to me and the way opened for an Atreides to sit on the throne."
    The Emperor turned, looked at Count Fenring. The Count met his stare -- gray eyes against green. The thought lay there clearly between them, their association so long that understanding could be achieved with a glance.
    Kill this upstart for me, the Emperor was saying. The Atreides is young and resourceful, yes -- but he is also tired from long effort and he'd be no match for you, anyway. Call him out now . . . you know the way of it. Kill him.
    Slowly, Fenring moved his head, a prolonged turning until he faced Paul.
    "Do it!" the Emperor hissed.
    The Count focused on Paul, seeing with eyes his Lady Margot had trained in the Bene Gesserit way, aware of the mystery and hidden grandeur about this Atreides youth.
    I could kill him, Fenring thought -- and he knew this for a truth.
    Something in his own secretive depths stayed the Count then, and he glimpsed briefly, inadequately, the advantage he held over Paul -- a way of hiding from the youth, a furtiveness of person and motives that no eye could penetrate.
    Paul, aware of some of this from the way the time nexus boiled, understood at last why he had never seen Fenring along the webs of prescience. Fenring was one of the might-have-beens, an almost Kwisatz Haderach, crippled by a flaw in the genetic pattern -- a eunuch, his talent concentrated into furtiveness and inner seclusion. A deep compassion for the Count flowed through Paul, the first sense of brotherhood he'd ever experienced.
    Fenring, reading Paul's emotion, said, "Majesty, I must refuse."
    Rage overcame Shaddam IV. He took two short steps through the entourage, cuffed Fenring viciously across the jaw.
    A dark flush spread up and over the Count's face. He looked directly at the Emperor, spoke with deliberate lack of emphasis: "We have been friends, Majesty. What I do now is out of friendship. I shall forget that you struck me."
    Paul cleared his throat, said: "We were speaking of the throne, Majesty."
    The Emperor whirled, glared at Paul. "I sit on the throne!" he barked.
    "You shall have a throne on Salusa Secundus," Paul said.
    "I put down my arms and came here on your word of bond!" the Emperor shouted. "You dare threaten --"
    "Your person is safe in my presence," Paul said. "An Atreides promised it. Muad'Dib, however, sentences you to your prison planet. But have no fear, Majesty. I will ease the harshness of the place with all the powers at my disposal. It shall become a garden world, full of gentle things."
    As the hidden import of Paul's words grew in the Emperor's mind, he glared across the room at Paul. "Now we see true motives," he sneered. 
    "Indeed," Paul said.
    "And what of Arrakis?" the Emperor asked. "Another garden world full of gentle things?"
    "The Fremen have the word of Muad'Dib," Paul said. "There will be flowing water here open to the sky and green oases rich with good things. But we have the spice to think of, too. Thus, there will always be desert on Arrakis . . . and fierce winds, and trials to toughen a man. We Fremen have a saying: 'God created Arrakis to train the faithful.' One cannot go against the word of God." 
    The old Truthsayer, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, had her own view of the hidden meaning in Paul's words now. She glimpsed the jihad and said: "You cannot loose these people upon the universe!"
    "You will think back to the gentle ways of the Sardaukar!" Paul snapped.
    "You cannot," she whispered.
    "You're a Truthsayer," Paul said. "Review your words." He glanced at the Princess Royal, back to the Emperor. "Best be done quickly, Majesty."
    The Emperor turned a stricken look upon his daughter. She touched his arm, spoke soothingly: "For this I was trained, Father." 
    He took a deep breath.
    "You cannot stay this thing," the old Truthsayer muttered.
    The Emperor straightened, standing stiffly with a look of remembered dignity. "Who will negotiate for you, kinsman?" he asked.
    Paul turned, saw his mother, her eyes heavy-lidded, standing with Chani in a squad of Fedaykin guards. He crossed to them, stood looking down at Chani.
    "I know the reasons," Chani whispered. "If it must be . . . Usul."
    Paul, hearing the secret tears in her voice, touched her cheek. "My Sihaya need fear nothing, ever," he whispered. He dropped his arm, faced his mother. "You will negotiate for me. Mother, with Chani by your side. She has wisdom and sharp eyes. And it is wisely said that no one bargains tougher than a Fremen. She will be looking through the eyes of her love for me and with the thought of her sons to be, what they will need. Listen to her." 
    Jessica sensed the harsh calculation in her son, put down a shudder. "What are your instructions?" she asked.
    "The Emperor's entire CHOAM Company holdings as dowry," he said.
    "Entire?" She was shocked almost speechless.
    "He is to be stripped. I'll want an earldom and CHOAM directorship for Gurney Halleck, and him in the fief of Caladan. There will be titles and attendant power for every surviving Atreides man, not excepting the lowliest trooper." 
    "What of the Fremen?" Jessica asked.
    "The Fremen are mine," Paul said. "What they receive shall be dispensed by Muad'Dib. It'll begin with Stilgar as Governor on Arrakis, but that can wait." 
    "And for me?" Jessica asked. 
    "Is there something you wish?"
    "Perhaps Caladan," she said, looking at Gurney. "I'm not certain. I've become too much the Fremen . . . and the Reverend Mother. I need a time of peace and stillness in which to think." 
    "That you shall have," Paul said, "and anything else that Gurney or I can give you."
    Jessica nodded, feeling suddenly old and tired. She looked at Chani. "And for the royal concubine?" 
    "No title for me," Chani whispered. "Nothing. I beg of you." 
    Paul stared down into her eyes, remembering her suddenly as she had stood once with little Leto in her arms, their child now dead in this violence. "I swear to you now," he whispered, "that you'll need no title. That woman over there will be my wife and you but a concubine because this is a political thing and we must weld peace out of this moment, enlist the Great Houses of the Landsraad. We must obey the forms. Yet that princess shall have no more of me than my name. No child of mine nor touch nor softness of glance, nor instant of desire."
    "So you say now," Chani said. She glanced across the room at the tail princess.
    "Do you know so little of my son?" Jessica whispered. "See that princess standing there, so haughty and confident. They say she has pretensions of a literary nature. Let us hope she finds solace in such things; she'll have little else." A bitter laugh escaped Jessica. "Think on it, Chani: that princess will have the name, yet she'll live as less than a concubine -- never to know a moment of tenderness from the man to whom she's bound. While we, Chani, we who carry the name of concubine -- history will call us wives."

= = = = = =

Appendix I: The Ecology of Dune

Beyond a critical point within a finite space, freedom diminishes as numbers increase. This is as true of humans in the finite space of a planetary ecosystem as it is of gas molecules in a sealed flask. The human question is not how many can possibly survive within the system, but what kind of existence is possible for those who do survive.
-Pardot Kynes, First Planetologist of Arrakis

    The effect of Arrakis on the mind of the newcomer usually is that of overpowering barren land. The stranger might think nothing could live or grow in the open here, that this was the true wasteland that had never been fertile and never would be.
    To Pardot Kynes, the planet was merely an expression of energy, a machine being driven by its sun. What it needed was reshaping to fit it to man's needs. His mind went directly to the free-moving human population, the Fremen. What a challenge! What a tool they could be! Fremen: an ecological and geological force of almost unlimited potential.
    A direct and simple man in many ways, Pardot Kynes. One must evade Harkonnen restrictions? Excellent. Then one marries a Fremen woman. When she gives you a Fremen son, you begin with him, with Liet-Kynes, and the other children, teaching them ecological literacy, creating a new language with symbols that arm the mind to manipulate an entire landscape, its climate, seasonal limits, and finally to break through all ideas of force into the dazzling awareness of order.
    "There's an internally recognized beauty of motion and balance on any man-healthy planet," Kynes said. "You see in this beauty a dynamic stabilizing effect essential to all life. Its aim is simple; to maintain and produce coordinated patterns of greater and greater diversity. Life improves the closed system's capacity to sustain life. Life -- all life -- is in the service of life. Necessary nutrients are made available to life by life in greater and greater richness as the diversity of life increases. The entire landscape comes alive, filled with relationships and relationships within relationships." 
    This was Pardot Kynes lecturing to a sietch warren class. 
    Before the lectures, though, he had to convince the Fremen. To understand how this came about, you must first understand the enormous single-mindedness, the innocence with which he approached any problem. He was not naive, he merely permitted himself no distractions.
    He was exploring the Arrakis landscape in a one-man groundcar one hot afternoon when he stumbled onto a deplorably common scene. Six Harkonnen bravos, shielded and fully armed, had trapped three Fremen youths in the open behind the Shield Wall near the village of Windsack. To Kynes, it was a ding-dong battle, more slapstick then real, until he focused on the fact that the Harkonnens intended to kill the Fremen. By this time, one of the youths was down with a severed artery, two of the bravos were down as well, but it was still four armed men against two striplings.
    Kynes wasn't brave; he merely had that single-mindedness and caution. The Harkonnens were killing Fremen. They were destroying the tools with which he intended to remake a planet! He triggered his own shield, waded in and had two of the Harkonnens dead with a slip-tip before they knew anyone was behind them. He dodged a sword thrust from one of the others, slit the man's throat with a neat entrisseur, and left the lone remaining bravo to the two Fremen youths, turning his full attention to saving the lad on the ground. And save the lad he did . . . while the sixth Harkonnen was being dispatched.
    Now here was a pretty kettle of sandtrout! The Fremen didn't know what to make of Kynes. They knew who he was, of course. No man arrived on Arrakis without a full dossier finding its way into the Fremen strongholds. They knew him: he was an Imperial servant.
    But he killed Harkonnens!
    Adults might have shrugged and, with some regret, sent his shade to join those of the six dead men on the ground. But these Fremen were inexperienced youths and all they could see was that they owed this Imperial servant a mortal obligation.
    Kynes wound up two days later in a sietch that looked down on Wind Pass. To him, it was all very natural. He talked to the Fremen about water, about dunes anchored by grass, about palmaries filled with date palms, about open qanats flowing across the desert. He talked and talked and talked.
    All around him raged a debate that Kynes never saw. What to do with this madman? He knew the location of a major sietch. What to do? What of his words, this mad talk about a paradise on Arrakis? Just talk. He knows too much. But he killed Harkonnens! What of the water burden? When did we owe the Imperium anything? He killed Harkonnens. Anyone can kill Harkonnens. I have done it myself.
    But what of this talk about the flowering of Arrakis? 
    Very simple: Where is the water for this? 
    He says it is here! And he did save three of ours.
    He saved three fools who had put themselves in the way of the Harkonnen fist! And he has seen crysknives!
    The necessary decision was known for hours before it was voiced. The tau of a sietch tells its members what they must do; even the most brutal necessity is known. An experienced fighter was sent with a consecrated knife to do the job. Two watermen followed him to get the water from the body. Brutal necessity.
    It's doubtful that Kynes even focused on his would-be executioner. He was talking to a group that spread around him at a cautious distance. He walked as he talked: a short circle, gesturing. Open water, Kynes said. Walk in the open without stillsuits. Water for dipping it out of a pond! Portyguls! 
    The knifeman confronted him.
    "Remove yourself," Kynes said, and went on talking about secret windtraps. He brushed past the man. Kynes' back stood open for the ceremonial blow. 
    What went on in that would-be executioner's mind cannot be known now. Did he finally listen to Kynes and believe? Who knows? But what he did is a matter of record. Uliet was his name, Older Liet. Uliet walked three paces and deliberately fell on his own knife, thus "removing" himself. Suicide? Some say Shai-hulud moved him.
    Talk about omens!
    From that instant, Kynes had but to point, saying "Go there." Entire Fremen tribes went. Men died, women died, children died. But they went.
    Kynes returned to his Imperial chores, directing the Biological Testing Stations. And now, Fremen began to appear among the Station personnel. The Fremen looked at each other. They were infiltrating the "system," a possibility they'd never considered. Station tools began finding their way into the sietch warrens -- especially cutterays which were used to dig underground catchbasins and hidden windtraps. 
    Water began collecting in the basins.
    It became apparent to the Fremen that Kynes was not a madman totally, just mad enough to be holy. He was one of the umma, the brotherhood of prophets. The shade of Uliet was advanced to the sadus, the throne of heavenly judges.
    Kynes -- direct, savagely intent Kynes -- knew that highly organized research is guaranteed to produce nothing new. He set up small-unit experiments with regular interchange of data for a swift Tansley effect, let each group find its own path. They must accumulate millions of tiny facts. He organized only isolated and rough run-through tests to put their difficulties into perspective.
    Core samplings were made throughout the bled. Charts were developed on the long drifts of weather that are called climate. He found that in the wide belt contained by the 70-degree lines, north and south, temperatures for thousands of years hadn't gone outside the 254-332 degrees (absolute) range, and that this belt had long growing seasons where temperatures ranged, from 284 to 302 degrees absolute: the "bonanza" range for terraform life . . . once they solved the water problem.
    When will we solve it? the Fremen asked. When will we see Arrakis as a paradise?
    In the manner of a teacher answering a child who has asked the sum of 2 plus 2, Kynes told them: "From three hundred to five hundred years."
    A lesser folk might have howled in dismay. But the Fremen had learned patience from men with whips. It was a bit longer than they had anticipated, but they all could see that the blessed day was coming. They tightened their sashes and went back to work. Somehow, the disappointment made the prospect of paradise more real.
    The concern on Arrakis was not with water, but with moisture. Pets were almost unknown, stock animals rare. Some smugglers employed the domesticated desert ass, the kulon, but the water price was high even when the beasts were fitted with modified stillsuits.
    Kynes thought of installing reduction plants to recover water from the hydrogen and oxygen locked in native rock, but the energy-cost factor was far too high. The polar caps (disregarding the false sense of water security they gave the pyons) held far too small an amount for his project . . . and he already suspected where the water had to be. There was that consistent increase of moisture at median altitudes, and in certain winds. There was that primary clue in the air balance -- 23 per cent oxygen, 75.4 per cent nitrogen and .023 per cent carbon dioxide -- with the trace gases taking up the rest.
    There was a rare native root plant that grew above the 2,500 meter level in the northern temperate zone. A tuber two meters long yielded half a liter of water. And there were the terraform desert plants: the tougher ones showed signs of thriving if planted in depressions lined with dew precipitators.
    Then Kynes saw the salt pan.
    His 'thopter, flying between stations far out on the bled, was blown off course by a storm. When the storm passed, there was the pan -- a giant oval depression some three hundred kilometers on the long axis -- a glaring white surprise in the open desert. Kynes landed, tasted the pan's storm-cleaned surface. 
    Salt.
    Now, he was certain.
    There'd been open water on Arrakis -- once. He began reexamining the evidence of the dry wells where trickles of water had appeared and vanished, never to return.
    Kynes set his newly trained Fremen limnologists to work: their chief clue, leathery scraps of matter sometimes found with the spice-mass after a blow. This had been ascribed to a fictional "sandtrout" in Fremen folk stories. As facts grew into evidence, a creature emerged to explain these leathery scraps -- a sandswimmer that blocked off water into fertile pockets within the porous lower strata below the 280 (absolute) line.
    This "water-stealer" died by the millions in each spice-blow. A five-degree change in temperature could kill it. The few survivors entered a semidormant cyst-hibernation to emerge in six years as small (about three meters long) sandworms. Of these, only a few avoided their larger brothers and pre-spice water pockets to emerge into maturity as the giant shai-hulud. (Water is poisonous to shai-hulud as the Fremen had long known from drowning the rare "stunted worm" of the Minor Erg to produce the awareness-spectrum narcotic they call Water of Life. The "stunted worm" is a primitive form of shai-hulud that reaches a length of only about nine meters.)
    Now they had the circular relationship: little maker to pre-spice mass; little maker to shai-hulud; shai-hulud to scatter the spice upon which fed microscopic creatures called sand plankton; the sand plankton, food for shai-hulud, growing, burrowing, becoming little makers.
    Kynes and his people turned their attention from these great relationships and focused now on micro-ecology. First, the climate: the sand surface often reached temperatures of 344 to 350 (absolute). A foot below ground it might be 55 cooler; a foot above ground, 25 cooler. Leaves or black shade could provide another 18 of cooling. Next, the nutrients: sand of Arrakis is mostly a product of worm digestion; dust (the truly omnipresent problem there) is produced by the constant surface creep, the "saltation" movement of sand. Coarse grains are found on the downwind sides of dunes. The windward side is packed smooth and hard. Old dunes are yellow (oxidized), young dunes are the color of the parent rock -- usually gray.
    Downwind sides of old dunes provided the first plantation areas. The Fremen aimed first for a cycle of poverty grass with peatlike hair cilia to intertwine, mat and fix the dunes by depriving the wind of its big weapon: movable grains.
    Adaptive zones were laid out in the deep south far from Harkonnen watchers. The mutated poverty grasses were planted first along the downwind (slipface) of the chosen dunes that stood across the path of the prevailing westerlies. With the downwind face anchored, the windward face grew higher and higher and the grass was moved to keep pace. Giant sifs (long dunes with sinuous crest) of more than 1,500 meters height were produced this way.
    When barrier dunes reached sufficient height, the windward faces were planted with tougher sword grasses. Each structure on a base about six times as thick as its height was anchored -- "fixed." 
    Now, they came in with deeper plantings -- ephemerals (chenopods, pigweeds, and amaranth to begin), then scotch broom, low lupine, vine eucalyptus (the type adapted for Caladan's northern reaches), dwarf tamarisk, shore pine -- then the true desert growths: candelilla, saguaro, and bis-naga, the barrel cactus. Where it would grow, they introduced camel sage, onion grass, gobi feather grass, wild alfalfa, burrow bush, sand verbena, evening primrose, incense bush, smoke tree, creosote bush.
    They turned then to the necessary animal life -- burrowing creatures to open the soil and aerate it: kit fox, kangaroo mouse, desert hare, sand terrapin . . . and the predators to keep them in check: desert hawk, dwarf owl, eagle and desert owl; and insects to fill the niches these couldn't reach: scorpion, centipede, trapdoor spider, the biting wasp and the wormfly . . . and the desert bat to keep watch on these.
    Now came the crucial test: date palms, cotton, melons, coffee, medicinals -- more than 200 selected food plant types to test and adapt.
    "The thing the ecologically illiterate don't realize about an ecosystem," Kynes said, "is that it's a system. A system! A system maintains a certain fluid stability that can be destroyed by a misstep in just one niche. A system has order, a flowing from point to point. If something dams that flow, order collapses. The untrained might miss that collapse until it was too late. That's why the highest function of ecology is the understanding of consequences." 
    Had they achieved a system?
    Kynes and his people watched and waited. The Fremen now knew what he meant by an open-end prediction to five hundred years.
    A report came up from the palmaries:
    At the desert edge of the plantings, the sand plankton is being poisoned through interaction with the new forms of life. The reason: protein incompatibility. Poisonous water was forming there which the Arrakis life would not touch. A barren zone surrounded the plantings and even shai-hulud would not invade it.
    Kynes went down to the palmaries himself -- a twenty-thumper trip (in a palanquin like a wounded man or Reverend Mother because he never became a sandrider). He tested the barren zone (it stank to heaven) and came up with a bonus, a gift from Arrakis.
    The addition of sulfur and fixed nitrogen converted the barren zone to a rich plant bed for terraform life. The plantings could be advanced at will!
    "Does this change the timing?" the Fremen asked.
    Kynes went back to his planetary formulae. Windtrap figures were fairly secure by then. He was generous with his allowances, knowing he couldn't draw neat lines around ecological problems. A certain amount of plant cover had to be set aside to hold dunes in place; a certain amount for foodstuffs (both human and animal); a certain amount to lock moisture in root systems and to feed water out into surrounding parched areas. They'd mapped the roving cold spots on the open bled by this time. These had to be figured into the formulae. Even shai-hulud had a place in the charts. He must never be destroyed, else spice wealth would end. But his inner digestive "factory," with its enormous concentrations of aldehydes and acids, was a giant source of oxygen. A medium worm (about 200 meters long) discharged into the atmosphere as much oxygen as ten square kilometers of green growing photosynthesis surface.
    He had the Guild to consider. The spice bribe to the Guild for preventing weather satellites and other watchers in the skies of Arrakis already had reached major proportions.
    Nor could the Fremen be ignored. Especially the Fremen, with their windtraps and irregular landholdings organized around water supply; the Fremen with their new ecological literacy and their dream of cycling vast areas of Arrakis through a prairie phase into forest cover.
    From the charts emerged a figure. Kynes reported it. Three per cent. If they could get three per cent of the green plant element on Arrakis involved in forming carbon compounds, they'd have their self-sustaining cycle.
    "But how long?" the Fremen demanded. 
    "Oh, that: about three hundred and fifty years." 
    So it was true as this umma had said in the beginning: the thing would not come in the lifetime of any man now living, nor in the lifetime of their grandchildren eight times removed, but it would come.
    The work continued: building, planting, digging, training the children.
    Then Kynes-the-Umma was killed in the cave-in at Plaster Basin.
    By this time his son, Liet-Kynes, was nineteen, a full Fremen and sandrider who had killed more than a hundred Harkonnens. The Imperial appointment for which the elder Kynes already had applied in the name of his son was delivered as a matter of course. The rigid class structure of the faufreluches had its well-ordered purpose here. The son had been trained to follow the father.
    The course had been set by this time, the Ecological-Fremen were aimed along their way. Liet-Kynes had only to watch and nudge and spy upon the Harkonnens . . . until the day his planet was afflicted by a Hero.

= = = = = =

Appendix II: The Religion of Dune

    Before the coming of Muad'Dib, the Fremen of Arrakis practiced a religion whose roots in the Maometh Saari are there for any scholar to see. Many have traced the extensive borrowings from other religions. The most common example is the Hymn to Water, a direct copy from the Orange Catholic Liturgical Manual, calling for rain clouds which Arrakis had never seen. But there are more profound points of accord between the Kitab al-Ibar of the Fremen and the teachings of Bible, Ilm, and Fiqh.
    Any comparison of the religious beliefs dominant in the Imperium up to the time of Muad'Dib must start with the major forces which shaped those beliefs:
    1. The followers of the Fourteen Sages, whose Book was the Orange Catholic Bible, and whose views are expressed in the Commentaries and other literature produced by the Commission of Ecumenical Translators. (C.E.T.);
    2. The Bene Gesserit, who privately denied they were a religious order, but who operated behind an almost impenetrable screen of ritual mysticism, and whose training, whose symbolism, organization, and internal teaching methods were almost wholly religious; 
    3. The agnostic ruling class (including the Guild) for whom religion was a kind of puppet show to amuse the populace and keep it docile, and who believed essentially that all phenomena -- even religious phenomena -- could be reduced to mechanical explanations;
    4. The so-called Ancient Teachings -- including those preserved by the Zensunni Wanderers from the first, second, and third Islamic movements; the Navachristianity of Chusuk, the Buddislamic Variants of the types dominant at Lankiveil and Sikun, the Blend Books of the Mahayana Lankavatara, the Zen Hekiganshu of III Delta Pavonis, the Tawrah and Talmudic Zabur surviving on Salusa Secundus, the pervasive Obeah Ritual, the Muadh Quran with its pure Ilm and Fiqh preserved among the pundi rice farmers of Caladan, the Hindu outcroppings found all through the universe in little pockets of insulated pyons, and finally, the Butlerian Jihad.
    There is a fifth force which shaped religious belief, but its effect is so universal and profound that it deserves to stand alone.
    This is, of course, space travel -- and in any discussion of religion, it deserves to be written thus:

SPACE TRAVEL!

    Mankind's movement through deep space placed a unique stamp on religion during the one hundred and ten centuries that preceded the Butlerian Jihad. To begin with, early space travel, although widespread, was largely unregulated, slow, and uncertain, and, before the Guild monopoly, was accomplished by a hodgepodge of methods. The first space experiences, poorly communicated and subject to extreme distortion, were a wild inducement to mystical speculation.
    Immediately, space gave a different flavor and sense to ideas of Creation. That difference is seen even in the highest religious achievements of the period. All through religion, the feeling of the sacred was touched by anarchy from the outer dark.
    It was as though Jupiter in all his descendant forms retreated into the maternal darkness to be superseded by a female immanence filled with ambiguity and with a face of many terrors.
    The ancient formulae intertwined, tangled together as they were fitted to the needs of new conquests and new heraldic symbols. It was a time of struggle between beast-demons on the one side and the old prayers and invocations on the other.
    There was never a clear decision.
    During this period, it was said that Genesis was reinterpreted, permitting God to say:
    "Increase and multiply, and fill the universe, and subdue it, and rule over all manner of strange beasts and living creatures in the infinite airs, on the infinite earths and beneath them." 
    It was a time of sorceresses whose powers were real. The measure of them is seen in the fact they never boasted how they grasped the firebrand.
    Then came the Butlerian Jihad -- two generations of chaos. The god of machine-logic was overthrown among the masses and a new concept was raised:
    "Man may not be replaced."
    Those two generations of violence were a thalamic pause for all humankind. Men looked at their gods and their rituals and saw that both were filled with that most terrible of all equations: fear over ambition.
    Hesitantly, the leaders of religions whose followers had spilled the blood of billions began meeting to exchange views. It was a move encouraged by the Spacing Guild, which was beginning to build its monopoly over all interstellar travel, and by the Bene Gesserit who were banding the sorceresses.
    Out of those first ecumenical meetings came two major developments: 
    1. The realization that all religions had at least one common commandment: "Thou shall not disfigure the soul." 
    2. The Commission of Ecumenical Translators.
    C.E.T. convened on a neutral island of Old Earth, spawning ground of the mother religions. They met "in the common belief that there exists a Divine Essence in the universe." Every faith with more than a million followers was represented, and they reached a surprisingly immediate agreement on the statement of their common goal:
    "We are here to remove a primary weapon from the hands of disputant religions. That weapon -- the claim to possession of the one and only revelation."
    Jubilation at this "sign of profound accord" proved premature. For more than a standard year, that statement was the only announcement from C.E.T. Men spoke bitterly of the delay. Troubadours composed witty, biting songs about the one hundred and twenty-one "Old Cranks" as the C.E.T. delegates came to be called. (The name arose from a ribald joke which played on the C.E.T. initials and called the delegates "Cranks-Effing-Turners.") One of the songs, "Brown Repose," has undergone periodic revival and is popular even today:

"Consider leis. 
Brown repose -- and 
The tragedy 
In all of those 
Cranks! All those Cranks! 
So laze -- so laze 
Through all your days. 
Time has toll'd for 
M'Lord Sandwich!"

    Occasional rumors leaked out of the C.E.T. sessions. It was said they were comparing texts and, irresponsibly, the texts were named. Such rumors inevitably provoked anti-ecumenism riots and, of course, inspired new witticisms. 
    Two years passed . . . three years.
    The Commissioners, nine of their original number having died and been replaced, paused to observe formal installation of the replacements and announced they were laboring to produce one book, weeding out "all the pathological symptoms" of the religious past.
    "We are producing an instrument of Love to be played in all ways," they said.
    Many consider it odd that this statement provoked the worst outbreaks of violence against ecumenism. Twenty delegates were recalled by their congregations. One committed suicide by stealing a space frigate and diving it into the sun.
    Historians estimate the riots took eighty million lives. That works out to about six thousand for each world then in the Landsraad League. Considering the unrest of the time, this may not be an excessive estimate, although any pretense to real accuracy in the figure must be just that -- pretense. Communication between worlds was at one of its lowest ebbs.
    The troubadours, quite naturally, had a field day. A popular musical comedy of the period had one of the C.E.T. delegates sitting on a white sand beach beneath a palm tree singing:

"For God, woman and the splendor of love 
We dally here sans fears or cares.
Troubadour! Troubadour, sing another melody 
For God, Woman and the splendor of love!"

    Riots and comedy are but symptoms of the times, profoundly revealing. They betray the psychological tone, the deep uncertainties . . . and the striving for something better, plus the fear that nothing would come of it all.
    The major dams against anarchy in these times were the embryo Guild, the Bene Gesserit and the Landsraad, which continued its 2,000-year record of meeting in spite of the severest obstacles. The Guild's part appears clear: they gave free transport for all Landsraad and C.E.T. business. The Bene Gesserit role is more obscure. Certainly, this is the time in which they consolidated their hold upon the sorceresses, explored the subtle narcotics, developed prana-bindu training and conceived the Missionaria Protectiva, that black arm of superstition. But it is also the period that saw the composing of the Litany against Fear and the assembly of the Azhar Book, that bibliographic marvel that preserves the great secrets of the most ancient faiths.
    Ingsley's comment is perhaps the only one possible: 
    "Those were times of deep paradox."
    For almost seven years, then, C.E.T. labored. And as their seventh anniversary approached, they prepared the human universe for a momentous announcement. On that seventh anniversary, they unveiled the Orange Catholic Bible.
    "Here is a work with dignity and meaning," they said. "Here is a way to make humanity aware of itself as a total creation of God." 
    The men of C.E.T. were likened to archeologists of ideas, inspired by God in the grandeur of rediscovery. It was said they had brought to light "the vitality of great ideals overlaid by the deposits of centuries," that they had "sharpened the moral imperatives that come out of a religious conscience."
    With the O.C. Bible, C.E.T. presented the Liturgical Manual and the Commentaries -- in many respects a more remarkable work, not only because of its brevity (less than half the size of the O.C. Bible), but also because of its candor and blend of self-pity and self-righteousness.
    The beginning is an obvious appeal to the agnostic rulers.
    "Men, finding no answers to the sunnan [the ten thousand religious questions from the Shari-ah] now apply their own reasoning. All men seek to be enlightened. Religion is but the most ancient and honorable way in which men have striven to make sense out of God's universe. Scientists seek the lawfulness of events. It is the task of Religion to fit man into this lawfulness." 
    In their conclusion, though, the Commentaries set a harsh tone that very likely foretold their fate.
    "Much that was called religion has carried an unconscious attitude of hostility toward life. True religion must teach that life is filled with joys pleasing to the eye of God, that knowledge without action is empty. All men must see that the teaching of religion by rules and rote is largely a hoax. The proper teaching is recognized with ease. You can know it without fail because it awakens within you that sensation which tells you this is something you've always known."
    There was an odd sense of calm as the presses and shigawire imprinters rolled and the O.C. Bible spread out through the worlds. Some interpreted this as a sign from God, an omen of unity.
    But even the C.E.T. delegates betrayed the fiction of that calm as they returned to their respective congregations. Eighteen of them were lynched within two months. Fifty-three recanted within the year.
    The O.C. Bible was denounced as a work produced by "the hubris of reason." It was said that its pages were filled with a seductive interest in logic. Revisions that catered to popular bigotry began appearing. These revisions leaned on accepted symbolisms (Cross, Crescent, Feather Rattle, the Twelve Saints, the thin Buddha, and the like) and it soon became apparent that the ancient superstitions and beliefs had not been absorbed by the new ecumenism.
    Halloway's label for C.E.T.'s seven-year effort -- "Galactophasic Determinism" -- was snapped up by eager billions who interpreted the initials G.D. as "God-Damned."
    C.E.T. Chairman Toure Bomoko, an Ulema of the Zensunnis and one of the fourteen delegates who never recanted ("The Fourteen Sages" of popular history), appeared to admit finally the C.E.T. had erred.
    "We shouldn't have tried to create new symbols," he said. "We should've realized we weren't supposed to introduce uncertainties into accepted belief, that we weren't supposed to stir up curiosity about God. We are daily confronted by the terrifying instability of all things human, yet we permit our religions to grow more rigid and controlled, more conforming and oppressive. What is this shadow across the highway of Divine Command? It is a warning that institutions endure, that symbols endure when their meaning is lost, that there is no summa of all attainable knowledge." 
    The bitter double edge in this "admission" did not escape Bomoko's critics and he was forced soon afterward to flee into exile, his life dependent upon the Guild's pledge of secrecy. He reportedly died on Tupile, honored and beloved, his last words: "Religion must remain an outlet for people who say to themselves, 'I am not the kind of person I want to be.' It must never sink into an assemblage of the self-satisfied."
    It is pleasant to think that Bomoko understood the prophecy in his words: "Institutions endure." Ninety generations later, the O.C. Bible and the Commentaries permeated the religious universe.
    When Paul-Muad'Dib stood with his right hand on the rock shrine enclosing his father's skull (the right hand of the blessed, not the left hand of the damned) he quoted word for word from "Bomoko's Legacy" --
    "You who have defeated us say to yourselves that Babylon is fallen and its works have been overturned. I say to you still that man remains on trial, each man in his own dock. Each man is a little war."
    The Fremen said of Muad'Dib that he was like Abu Zide whose frigate defied the Guild and rode one day 'there' and back. 'There' used in this way translates directly from the Fremen mythology as the land of the ruh-spirit, the alam al-mithal where all limitations are removed.
    The parallel between this and the Kwisatz Haderach is readily seen. The Kwisatz Haderach that the Sisterhood sought through its breeding program was interpreted as "The shortening of the way" or "The one who can be two places simultaneously." 
    But both of these interpretations can be shown to stem directly from the Commentaries: "When law and religious duty are one, your selfdom encloses the universe."
    Of himself, Muad'Dib said: "I am a net in the sea of time, free to sweep future and past. I am a moving membrane from whom no possibility can escape."
    These thoughts are all one and the same and they harken to 22 Kalima in the O.C. Bible where it says: "Whether a thought is spoken or not it is a real thing and has powers of reality." 
    It is when we get into Muad'Dib's own commentaries in "The Pillars of the Universe" as interpreted by his holy men, the Qizara Tafwid, that we see his real debt to C.E.T. and Fremen-Zensunni.

    Muad'Dib: "Law and duty are one; so be it. But remember these limitations -- Thus are you never fully self-conscious. Thus do you remain immersed in the communal tau. Thus are you always less than an individual." 
    O.C. Bible: Identical wording. (61 Revelations.) 
    Muad'Dib: "Religion often partakes of the myth of progress that shields us from the terrors of an uncertain future."
    C.E.T. Commentaries: Identical wording. (The Azhar Book traces this statement to the first century religious writer, Neshou; through a paraphrase.)
    Muad'Dib: "If a child, an untrained person, an ignorant person, or an insane person incites trouble, it is the fault of authority for not predicting and preventing that trouble. "
    O.C. Bible: "Any sin can be ascribed, at least in part, to a natural bad tendency that is an extenuating circumstance acceptable to God." (The Azhar Book traces this to the ancient Semitic Tawra.) 
    Muad'Dib: "Reach forth thy hand and eat what God has provided thee; and when thou are replenished, praise the Lord." 
    O.C. Bible: a paraphrase with identical meaning. (The Azhar Book traces this in slightly different form to First Islam.) 
    Muad'Dib: "Kindness is the beginning of cruelty." 
    Fremen Kitab al-Ibar: "The weight of a kindly God is a fearful thing. Did not God give us the burning sun (Al-Lat)? Did not God give us the Mothers of Moisture (Reverend Mothers)? Did not God give us Shaitan (Iblis, Satan)? From Shaitan did we not get the hurtfulness of speed?"
    (This is the source of the Fremen saying: "Speed comes from Shaitan." Consider: for every one hundred calories of heat generated by exercise [speed] the body evaporates about six ounces of perspiration. The Fremen word for perspiration is bakka or tears and, in one pronunciation, translates: "The life essence that Shaitan squeezes from your soul.")

    Muad'Dib's arrival is called "religiously timely" by Koneywell, but timing had little to do with it. As Muad'Dib himself said: "I am here; so . . . "
    It is, however, vital to an understanding of Muad'Dib's religious impact that you never lose sight of one fact: the Fremen were a desert people whose entire ancestry was accustomed to hostile landscapes. Mysticism isn't difficult when you survive each second by surmounting open hostility. "You are there -- so . . . "
    With such a tradition, suffering is accepted -- perhaps as unconscious punishment, but accepted. And it's well to note that Fremen ritual gives almost complete freedom from guilt feelings. This isn't necessarily because their law and religion were identical, making disobedience a sin. It's likely closer to the mark to say they cleansed themselves of guilt easily because their everyday existence required brutal judgments (often deadly) which in a softer land would burden men with unbearable guilt.
    This is likely one of the roots of Fremen emphasis on superstition (disregarding the Missionaria Protectiva's ministrations). What matter that whistling sands are an omen? What matter that you must make the sign of the fist when first you see First Moon? A man's flesh is his own and his water belongs to the tribe -- and the mystery of life isn't a problem to solve but a reality to experience. Omens help you remember this. And because you are here, because you have the religion, victory cannot evade you in the end.
    As the Bene Gesserit taught for centuries, long before they ran afoul of the Fremen:
    "When religion and politics ride the same cart, when that cart is driven by a living holy man (baraka), nothing can stand in their path."

= = = = = =

Appendix III: Report on Bene Gesserit Motives and Purposes

Here follows an excerpt from the Summa prepared by her own agents at the request of the Lady Jessica immediately after the Arrakis Affair. The candor of this report amplifies its value far beyond the ordinary.

    Because the Bene Gesserit operated for centuries behind the blind of a semi-mystic school while carrying on their selective breeding program among humans, we tend to award them with more status than they appear to deserve. Analysis of their "trial of fact" on the Arrakis Affair betrays the school's profound ignorance of its own role.
    It may be argued that the Bene Gesserit could examine only such facts as were available to them and had no direct access to the person of the Prophet Muad'Dib. But the school had surmounted greater obstacles and its error here goes deeper.
    The Bene Gesserit program had as its target the breeding of a person they labeled "Kwisatz Haderach," a term signifying "one who can be many places at once." In simpler terms, what they sought was a human with mental powers permitting him to understand and use higher order dimensions.
    They were breeding for a super-Mentat, a human computer with some of the prescient abilities found in Guild navigators. Now, attend these facts carefully:
    Muad'Dib, born Paul Atreides, was the son of the Duke Leto, a man whose bloodline had been watched carefully for more than a thousand years. The Prophet's mother, Lady Jessica, was a natural daughter of the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and carried gene-markers whose supreme importance to the breeding program was known for almost two thousand years. She was a Bene Gesserit bred and trained, and should have been a willing tool of the project.
    The Lady Jessica was ordered to produce an Atreides daughter. The plan was to inbreed this daughter with Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen, a nephew of the Baron Vladimir, with the high probability of a Kwisatz Haderach from that union. Instead, for reasons she confesses have never been completely clear to her, the concubine Lady Jessica defied her orders and bore a son.
    This alone should have alerted the Bene Gesserit to the possibility that a wild variable had entered their scheme. But there were other far more important indications that they virtually ignored:
    1. As a youth, Paul Atreides showed ability to predict the future. He was known to have had prescient visions that were accurate, penetrating, and defied four-dimensional explanation.
    2. The Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Bene Gesserit Proctor who tested Paul's humanity when he was fifteen, deposes that he surmounted more agony in the test than any other human of record. Yet she failed to make special note of this in her report!
    3. When Family Atreides moved to the planet Arrakis, the Fremen population there hailed the young Paul as a prophet, "the voice from the outer world." The Bene Gesserit were well aware that the rigors of such a planet as Arrakis with its totality of desert landscape, its absolute lack of open water, its emphasis on the most primitive necessities for survival, inevitably produces a high proportion of sensitives. Yet this Fremen reaction and the obvious element of the Arrakeen diet high in spice were glossed over by Bene Gesserit observers.
    4. When the Harkonnens and the soldier-fanatics of the Padishah Emperor reoccupied Arrakis, killing Paul's father and most of the Atreides troops, Paul and his mother disappeared. But almost immediately there were reports of a new religious leader among the Fremen, a man called Muad'Dib, who again was hailed as "the voice from the outer world." The reports stated clearly that he was accompanied by a new Reverend Mother of the Sayyadina Rite "who is the woman who bore him." Records available to the Bene Gesserit stated in plain terms that the Fremen legends of the Prophet contained these words: "He shall be born of a Bene Gesserit witch."
    (It may be argued here that the Bene Gesserit sent their Missionaria Protectiva onto Arrakis centuries earlier to implant something like this legend as safeguard should any members of the school be trapped there and require sanctuary, and that this legend of "the voice from the outer world" was properly to be ignored because it appeared to be the standard Bene Gesserit ruse. But this would be true only if you granted that the Bene Gesserit were correct in ignoring the other clues about Paul-Muad'Dib.)
    5. When the Arrakis Affair boiled up, the Spacing Guild made overtures to the Bene Gesserit. The Guild hinted that its navigators, who use the spice drug of Arrakis to produce the limited prescience necessary for guiding spaceships through the void, were "bothered about the future" or saw "problems on the horizon." This could only mean they saw a nexus, a meeting place of countless delicate decisions, beyond which the path was hidden from the prescient eye. This was a clear indication that some agency was interfering with higher order dimensions!
    (A few of the Bene Gesserit had long been aware that the Guild could not interfere directly with the vital spice source because Guild navigators already were dealing in their own inept way with higher order dimensions, at least to the point where they recognized that the slightest misstep they made on Arrakis could be catastrophic. It was a known fact that Guild navigators could predict no way to take control of the spice without producing just such a nexus. The obvious conclusion was that someone of higher order powers was taking control of the spice source, yet the Bene Gesserit missed this point entirely!)
    In the face of these facts, one is led to the inescapable conclusion that the inefficient Bene Gesserit behavior in this affair was a product of an even higher plan of which they were completely unaware!

= = = = = =

Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses)

  SHADDAM IV (10,134-10,202) 
The Padishah Emperor, 81st of his line (House Corrino) to occupy the Golden Lion Throne, reigned from 10,156 (date his father, Elrood IX, succumbed to chaumurky) until replaced by the 10,196 Regency set up in the name of his eldest daughter, Irulan. His reign is noted chiefly for the Arrakis Revolt, blamed by many historians on Shaddam IV's dalliance with Court functions and the pomp of office. The ranks of Bursegs were doubled in the first sixteen years of his reign. Appropriations for Sardaukar training went down steadily in the final thirty years before the Arrakis Revolt. He had five daughters (Irulan, Chalice, Wensicia, Josifa, and Rugi) and no legal sons. Four of the daughters accompanied him into retirement. His wife, Anirul, a Bene Gesserit of Hidden Rank, died in 10,176.
  LETO ATREIDES (10,140-10,191) 
A distaff cousin of the Corrinos, he is frequently referred to as the Red Duke. House Atreides ruled Caladan as a siridar-fief for twenty generations until pressured into the move to Arrakis. He is known chiefly as the father of Duke Paul Muad'Dib, the Umma Regent. The remains of Duke Leto occupy the "Skull Tomb" on Arrakis. His death is attributed to the treachery of a Suk doctor, and is an act laid to the Siridar-Baron, Vladimir Harkonnen. 
  LADY JESSICA (Hon. Atreides) (10,154-10,256) 
A natural daughter (Bene Gesserit reference) of the Siridar-Baron Vladimir Harkonnen. Mother of Duke Paul Muad'Dib. She graduated from the Wallach IX B.G. School. 
  LADY ALIA ATREIDES (10,191-   ) 
Legal daughter of Duke Leto-Atreides and his formal concubine, Lady Jessica. Lady Alia was born on Arrakis about eight months after Duke Leto's death. Prenatal exposure to an awareness-spectrum narcotic is the reason generally given for Bene Gesserit references to her as "Accursed One." She is known in popular history as St. Alia or St. Alia-of-the-Knife. (For a detailed history, see St. Alia, Huntress of a Billion Worlds by Pander Oulson.) 
  VLADIMIR HARKONNEN (10,110-10,193)
Commonly referred to as Baron Harkonnen, his title is officially Siridar (planetary governor) Baron. Vladimir Harkonnen is the direct-line male descendant of the Bashar Abulurd Harkonnen who was banished for cowardice after the Battle of Corrin. The return of House Harkonnen to power generally is ascribed to adroit manipulation of the whale fur market and later consolidation with melange wealth from Arrakis. The Siridar-Baron died on Arrakis during the Revolt. Title passed briefly to the na-Baron, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen. 
  COUNT HASIMIR FENRING (10,133-10,225) 
A distaff cousin of House Corrino, he was a childhood companion of Shaddam IV. (The frequently discredited Pirate History of Corrino related the curious story that Fenring was responsible for the chaumurky which disposed of Elrood IX.) All accounts agree that Fenring was the closest friend Shaddam IV possessed. The Imperial chores carried out by Count Fenring included that of Imperial Agent on Arrakis during the Harkonnen regime there and later Siridar-Absentia of Caladan. He joined Shaddam IV in retirement on Salusa Secundus.
  COUNT GLOSSU RABBAN (10,132-10,193) 
Glossu Rabban, Count of Lankiveil, was the eldest nephew of Vladimir Harkonnen. Glossu Rabban and Feyd-Rautha Rabban (who took the name Harkonnen when chosen for the Siridar-Baron's household) were legal sons of the Siridar-Baron's youngest demibrother, Abulurd. Abulurd renounced the Harkonnen name and all rights to the title when given the subdistrict governorship of Rabban-Lankiveil. Rabban was a distaff name.

= = = = = =

Terminology of the Imperium

In studying the Imperium, Arrakis, and the whole culture which produced Muad'Dib, many unfamiliar terms occur. To increase understanding is a laudable goal, hence the definitions and explanations given below.

ABA: loose robe worn by Fremen women; usually black. 
ACH: left turn: a worm-steersman's call.
ADAB: the demanding memory that comes upon you of itself. 
AKARSO: a plant native to Sikun (of 70 Ophiuchi A) characterized by almost oblong leaves. Its green and white stripes indicate the constant multiple, condition of parallel active and dormant chlorophyll regions.
ALAM AL-MITHAL: the mystical world of similitudes where all physical limitations are removed.
AL-LAT: mankind's original sun; by usage: any planet's primary. 
AMPOLIROS: the legendary "Flying Dutchman" of space. 
AMTAL or AMTAL RULE: a common rule on primitive worlds under which something is tested to determine its limits or defects. Commonly: testing to destruction.
AQL: the test of reason. Originally, the "Seven Mystic Questions" beginning: "Who is it that thinks?" 
ARRAKEEN: first settlement on Arrakis; long-time seat of planetary government.
ARRAKIS: the planet known as Dune; third planet of Canopus. 
ASSASSINS' HANDBOOK: Third-century compilation of poisons commonly used in a War of Assassins. Later expanded to include those deadly devices permitted under the Guild Peace and Great Convention.
AULIYA: In the Zensunni Wanderers' religion, the female at the left hand of God; God's handmaiden.
AUMAS: poison administered in food. (Specifically: poison in solid food.) In some dialects: Chaumas. 
AYAT: the signs of life. (See Burhan.)

BAKKA: in Fremen legend, the weeper who mourns for all mankind.
BAKLAWA: a heavy pastry made with date syrup. 
BALISET: a nine-stringed musical instrument, lineal descendant of the zither, tuned to the Chusuk scale and played by strumming. Favorite instrument of Imperial troubadours.
BARADYE PISTOL: a static-charge dust gun developed on Arrakis for laying down a large dye marker area on sand. 
BARAKA: a living holy man of magical powers. 
BASHAR (often Colonel Bashar): an officer of the Sardaukar a fractional point above Colonel in the standardized military classification. Rank created for military ruler of a planetary subdistrict. (Bashar of the Corps is a title reserved strictly for military use.) 
BATTLE LANGUAGE: any special language of restricted etymology developed for clear-speech communication in warfare. 
BEDWINE: see Ichwan Bedwine.
BELA TEGEUSE: fifth planet of Kuentsing: third stopping place of the Zensunni (Fremen) forced migration.
BENE GESSERIT: the ancient school of mental and physical training established primarily for female students after the Butlerian Jihad destroyed the so-called "thinking machines" and robots.
B.G.: idiomatic for Bene Gesserit except when used with a date. With a date it signifies Before Guild and identifies the Imperial dating system based on the genesis of the Spacing Guild's monopoly.
BHOTANIJIB: See Chakobsa.
BI-LA KAIFA: Amen. (Literally: "Nothing further need be explained.") 
BINDU: relating to the human nervous system, especially to nerve training. Often expressed as Bindu-nervature. (See Prana.) 
BINDU SUSPENSION: a special form of catalepsis, self-induced. 
BLED: flat, open desert.
BOURKA: insulated mantle worn by Fremen in the open desert. 
BURHAN: the proofs of life. (Commonly: the ayat and burhan of life. See Ayat.) 
BURSEG: a commanding general of the Sardaukar. 
BUTLERIAN JIHAD; see Jihad, Butlerian (also Great Revolt).

CAID: Sardaukar officer rank given to a military official whose duties call mostly for dealings with civilians; a military governorship over a full planetary district; above the rank of Bashar but not equal to a Burseg.
CALADAN: third planet of Delta Pavonis; birthworld of Paul-Muad'Dib.
CANTO and RESPONDU: an invocation rite, part of the panoplia propheticus of the Missionaria Protectiva.
CARRYALL: a flying wing (commonly "wing"), the aerial workhorse of Arrakis, used to transport large spice mining, hunting, and refining equipment.
CATCHPOCKET: any stillsuit pocket where filtered water is caught and stored.
CHAKOBSA: the so-called "magnetic language" derived in part from the ancient Bhotani (Bhotani Jib -- jib meaning dialect). A collection of ancient dialects modified by needs of secrecy, but chiefly the hunting language of the Bhotani, the hired assassins of the first Wars of Assassins.
CHAUMAS (Aumas in some dialects): poison in solid food as distinguished from poison administered in some other way. 
CHAUMURKY (Musky or Murky in some dialects): poison administered in a drink.
CHEOPS: pyramid chess; nine-level chess with the double object of putting your queen at the apex and the opponent's king in check.
CHEREM: a brotherhood of hate (usually for revenge). 
CHOAM: acronym for Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles -- the universal development corporation controlled by the Emperor and Great Houses with the Guild and Bene Gesserit as silent partners.
CHUSUK: fourth planet of Theta Shalish; the so-called "Music Planet" noted for the quality of its musical instruments. (See Varota.)
CIELAGO: any modified Chiroptera of Arrakis adapted to carry distrans messages.
CONE OF SILENCE: the field of a distorter that limits the carrying power of the voice or any other vibrator by damping the vibrations with an image-vibration 180 degrees out of phase. 
CORIOLIS STORM: any major sandstorm on Arrakis where winds across the open flatlands are amplified by the planet's own revolutionary motion to reach speeds up to 700 kilometers per hour.
CORRIN, BATTLE OF: the space battle from which the Imperial House Corrino took its name. The battle fought near Sigma Draconis in the year 88 B.G. settled the ascendancy of the ruling House from Salusa Secundus.
COUSINES: blood relations beyond cousins.
CRUSHERS: military space vessels composed of many smaller vessels locked together and designed to fall on an enemy position, crushing it.
CUTTERAY: short-range version of lasgun used mostly as a cutting tool and surgeon's scalpel.
CRYSKNIFE: the sacred knife of the Fremen on Arrakis. It is manufactured in two forms from teeth taken from dead sandworms. The two forms are "fixed" and "unfixed." An unfixed knife requires proximity to a human body's electrical field to prevent disintegration. Fixed knives are treated for storage. All are about 20 centimeters long.

DAR AL-HIKMAN: school of religious translation or interpretation.
DARK THINGS: idiomatic for the infectious superstitions taught by the Missionaria Protectiva to susceptible civilizations. 
DEATH TRIPOD: originally; the tripod upon which desert executioners hanged their victims. By usage: the three members of a Cherem sworn to the same revenge.
DERCH: right turn; a worm steersman's call.
DEW COLLECTORS or DEW PRECIPITATORS: not to be confused with dew gatherers. Collectors or precipitators are egg-shaped devices about four centimeters on the long axis. They are made of chromoplastic that turns a reflecting white when subjected to light, and reverts to transparency in darkness. The collector forms a markedly cold surface upon which dawn dew will precipitate. They are used by Fremen to line concave planting depressions where they provide a small but reliable source of water.
DEW GATHERERS: workers who reap dew from the plants of Arrakis, using a scythelike dew reaper.
DEMIBROTHERS: sons of concubines in the same household and certified as having the same father.
DICTUM FAMILIA: that rule of the Great Convention which prohibits the slaying of a royal person or member of a Great House by informal treachery. The rule sets up the formal outline and limits the means of assassination.
DISTRANS: a device for producing a temporary neural imprint on the nervous system of Chiroptera or birds. The creature's normal cry then carries the message imprint which can be sorted from that carrier wave by another distrans.
DRUM SAND: impaction of sand in such away that any sudden blow against its surface produces a distinct drum sound. 
DOORSEAL: a portable plastic hermetic seal used for moisture security in Fremen overday cave camps.
DUMP BOXES: the general term for any cargo container of irregular shape and equipped with ablation surfaces and suspensor damping system. They are used to dump material from space onto a planet's surface.
DUNE MEN: idiomatic for open sand workers, spice hunters and the like on Arrakis. Sandworkers. Spiceworkers. 
DUST CHASM: any deep crevasse or depression on the desert of Arrakis that has been filled with dust not apparently different from the surrounding surface; a deadly trap because human or animal will sink in it and smother. (See Tidal Dust Basin.)

ECAZ: fourth planet of Alpha Centauri B; the sculptors' paradise, so called because it is the home of fogwood, the plant growth capable of being shaped in situ solely by the power of human thought.
EGO-LIKENESS: portraiture reproduced through a shigawire projector that is capable of reproducing subtle movements said to convey the ego essence.
ELACCA DRUG: narcotic formed by burning blood-grained elacca wood of Ecas. Its effect is to remove most of the will to self-preservation. Druggee skin shows a characteristic carrot color. Commonly used to prepare slave gladiators for the ring. 
EL-SAYAL: the "rain of sand." A fall of dust which has been carried to medium altitude (around 2,000 meters) by a coriolis storm. El-sayals frequently bring moisture to ground level. 
ERG: an extensive dune area, a sea of sand.

FAI: the water tribute, chief specie of tax on Arrakis. 
FANMETAL: metal formed by the growing of jasmium crystals in duraluminum; noted for extreme tensile strength in relationship to weight. Name derives from its common use in collapsible structures that are opened by "fanning" them out. 
FAUFRELUCHES; the rigid rule of class distinction enforced by the Imperium. "A place for every man and every man in his place." 
FEDAYKIN: Fremen death commandos; historically: a group formed and pledged to give their lives to right a wrong. 
FILMBOOK: any shigawire imprint used in training and carrying a mnemonic pulse.
FILT-PLUG: a nose filter unit worn with a stillsuit to capture moisture from the exhaled breath.
FIQH: knowledge, religious law; one of the half-legendary origins of the Zensunni Wanderers' religion.
FIRE, PILLAR OF: a simple pyrocket for signaling across the open desert.
FIRST MOON: the major satellite of Arrakis, first to rise in the night; notable for a distinct human fist pattern on its surface. 
FREE TRADERS: idiomatic for smugglers.
FREMEN: the free tribes of Arrakis, dwellers in the desert, remnants of the Zensunni Wanderers. ("Sand Pirates" according to the Imperial Dictionary.) 
FREMKIT: desert survival kit of Fremen manufacture. 
FRIGATE: largest spaceship that can be grounded on a planet and taken off in one piece.

GALACH: official language of the Imperium. Hybrid Inglo-Slavic with strong traces of cultural-specialization terms adopted during the long chain of human migrations.
GAMONT: third planet of Niushe; noted for its hedonistic culture and exotic sexual practices. 
GARE: butte.
GATHERING: distinguished from Council Gathering. It is a formal convocation of Fremen leaders to witness a combat that determines tribal leadership. (A Council Gathering is an assembly to arrive at decisions involving all the tribes.) 
GEYRAT: straight ahead; a worm steersman's call. 
GHAFLA: giving oneself up to gadfly distractions. Thus: a changeable person, one not to be trusted.
GHANIMA: something acquired in battle or single combat. Commonly, a memento of combat kept only to stir the memory. 
GIEDI PRIME: the planet of Ophiuchi B (36), homeworld of House Harkonnen. A median-viable planet with a low active-photosynthesis range.
GINAZ, HOUSE OF: one-time allies of Duke Leto Atreides. They were defeated in the War of Assassins with Grumman. 
GIUDICHAR: a holy truth. (Commonly seen in the expression Giudichar mantene: an original and supporting truth.) 
GLOWGLOBE: suspensor-buoyed illuminating device, self-powered (usually by organic batteries).
GRABEN: a long geological ditch formed when the ground sinks because of movements in the underlying crustal layers. 
GREAT CONVENTION: the universal truce enforced under the power balance maintained by the Guild, the Great Houses, and the Imperium. Its chief rule prohibits the use of atomic weapons against human targets. Each rule of the Great Convention begins: "The forms must be obeyed . . . " 
GREAT MOTHER: the horned goddess, the feminine principle of space (commonly: Mother Space), the feminine face of the male-female-neuter trinity accepted as Supreme Being by many religions within the Imperium.
GREAT REVOLT: common term for the Butlerian Jihad. (See Jihad, Butlerian.) 
GRIDEX PLANE: a differential-charge separator used to remove sand from the melange spice mass; a device of the second stage in spice refining.
GRUMMAN: second planet of Niushe, noted chiefly for the feud of its ruling House (Moritani) with House Ginaz. 
GOM JABBAR; the high-handed enemy; that specific poison needle tipped with meta-cyanide used by Bene Gesserit Proctors in the death-alternative test of human awareness. 
GUILD: the Spacing Guild, one leg of the political tripod maintaining the Great Convention. The Guild was the second mental-physical training school (see Bene Gesserit) after the Butlerian Jihad. The Guild monopoly on space travel and transport and upon international banking is taken as the beginning point of the Imperial Calendar.

HAGAL: the "Jewel Planet" (II Theta Shaowei), mined out in the time of Shaddam I.
HAIIIII-YOH!: command to action; worm steersman's call. 
HAJJ: holy journey.
HARJ: desert journey, migration. 
HAJRA: journey of seeking.
HAL YAWM: "Now! At last!" a Fremen exclamation.
HARMONTHEP: Ingsley gives this as the planet name for the sixth stop in the Zensunni migration. It is supposed to have been a no longer existent satellite of Delta Pavonis.
HARVESTER or HARVESTER FACTORY: a large (often 120 meters by 40 meters) spice mining machine commonly employed on rich, uncontaminated melange blows. (Often called a "crawler" because of buglike body on independent tracks.) 
HEIGHLINER: major cargo carrier of the Spacing Guild's transportation system.
HIEREG: temporary Fremen desert camp on open sand. 
HIGH COUNCIL: the Landsraad inner circle empowered to act as supreme tribunal in House to House disputes.
HOLTZMAN EFFECT: the negative repelling effect of a shield generator.
HOOKMAN: Fremen with Maker hooks prepared to catch a sandworm.
HOUSE: idiomatic for Ruling Clan of a planet or planetary system. 
HOUSES MAJOR: holders of planetary fiefs; interplanetary entrepreneurs. (See House above.) 
HOUSES MINOR: planet-bound entrepreneur class (Galach: "Richece").
HUNTER-SEEKER: a ravening sliver of suspensor-buoyed metal guided as a weapon by a near-by control console; common assassination device.

IBAD, EYES OF: characteristic effect of a diet high in melange wherein the whites and pupils of the eyes turn a deep blue (indicative of deep melange addiction).
IBN QIRTAIBA: "Thus go the holy words . . ." Formal beginning to Fremen religious incantation (derived from panoplia propheticus).
ICHWAN BEDWINE: the brotherhood of all Fremen on Arrakis. 
IJAZ: prophecy that by its very nature cannot be denied; immutable prophecy.
IKHUT-EIGH!: cry of the water-seller on Arrakis (etymology uncertain). See Soo-Soo Sook!
ILM: theology; science of religious tradition; one of the half-legendary origins of the Zensunni Wanderers' faith. 
IMPERIAL CONDITIONING: a development of the Suk Medical Schools: the highest conditioning against taking human life. Initiates are marked by a diamond tattoo on the forehead and are permitted to wear their hair long and bound by a silver Suk ring. 
INKVINE: a creeping plant native to Giedi Prime and frequently used as a whip in the slave cribs. Victims are marked by beet-colored tattoos that cause residual pain for many years. 
ISTISLAH: a rule for the general welfare; usually a preface to brutal necessity. IX: see Richese.

JIHAD: a religious crusade; fanatical crusade.
JIHAD, BUTLERIAN: (see also Great Revolt) -- the crusade against computers, thinking machines, and conscious robots begun in 201 B.G. and concluded in 108 B.G. Its chief commandment remains in the O.C. Bible as "Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind." 
JUBBA CLOAK: the all-purpose cloak (it can beset to reflect or admit radiant heat, converts to a hammock or shelter) commonly worn over a stillsuit on Arrakis.
JUDGE OF THE CHANGE: an official appointed by the Landsraad High Council and the Emperor to monitor a change of fief, a kanly negotiation, or formal battle in a War of Assassins. The Judge's arbitral authority may be challenged only before the High Council with the Emperor present.

KANLY: formal feud or vendetta under the rules of the Great Convention carried on according to the strictest limitations. (See Judge of the Change.) Originally the rules were designed to protect innocent bystanders.
KARAMA: a miracle; an action initiated by the spirit world.
KHALA: traditional invocation to still the angry spirits of a place whose name you mention.
KINDJAL: double bladed short sword (or long knife) with about 20 centimeters of slightly curved blade.
KISWA; any figure or design from Fremen mythology. 
KITAB AL-IBAR: the combined survival handbook-religious manual developed by the Fremen on Arrakis.
KRIMSKELL FIBER or KRIMSKELL ROPE: the "claw fiber" woven from strands of the hufuf vine from Ecaz. Knots tied in krimskell will claw tighter and tighter to preset limits when the knot-lines are pulled. (For a more detailed study, see Holjance Vohnbrook's "The Strangler Vines of Ecaz.") 
KULL WAHAD!: "I am profoundly stirred!" A sincere exclamation of surprise common in the Imperium. Strict interpretation depends on context. (It is said of Muad'Dib that once he watched a desert hawk chick emerge from its shell and whispered: "Kull wahad!") 
KULON: wild ass of Terra's Asiatic steppes adapted for Arrakis. 
KWISATZ HADERACH: "Shortening of the Way." This is the label applied by the Bene Gesserit to the unknown for which they sought a genetic solution: a male Bene Gesserit whose organic mental powers would bridge space and time.

LA, LA, LA: Fremen cry of grief. (La translates as ultimate denial, a "no" from which you cannot appeal.) 
LASGUN: continuous-wave laser projector. Its use as a weapon is limited in a field-generator-shield culture because of the explosive pyrotechnics (technically, subatomic fusion) created when its beam intersects a shield.
LEGION, IMPERIAL: ten brigades (about 30,000 men). 
LIBAN: Fremen liban is spice water infused with yucca flour. Originally a sour milk drink.
LISAN AL-GAIB: "The Voice from the Outer World." In Fremen messianic legends, an off-world prophet. Sometimes translated as "Giver of Water." (See Mahdi.) 
LITERJON: a one-liter container for transporting water on Arrakis; made of high-density, shatterproof plastic with positive seal. 
LITTLE MAKER: the half-plant-half-animal deep-sand vector of the Arrakis sandworm. The Little Maker's excretions form the pre-spice mass.

MAHDI: in the Fremen messianic legend, "The One Who Will Lead Us to Paradise."
MAKER: see Shai-hulud.
MAKER HOOKS: the hooks used for capturing, mounting, and steering a sandworm of Arrakis.
MANTENE: underlying wisdom, supporting argument, first principle. (See Giudichar.) 
MATING INDEX: the Bene Gesserit master record of its human breeding program aimed at producing the Kwisatz Haderach. 
MAULA: slave.
MAULA PISTOL: spring-loaded gun for firing poison darts; range about forty meters.
MELANGE: the "spice of spices," the crop for which Arrakis is the unique source. The spice, chiefly noted for its geriatric qualities, is mildly addictive when taken in small quantities, severely addictive when imbibed in quantities above two grams daily per seventy kilos of body weight. (See Ibad, Water of Life, and Pre-spice Mass.) Muad'Dib claimed the spice as a key to his prophetic powers. Guild navigators make similar claims. Its price on the Imperial market has ranged as high as 620,000 Solaris the decagram.
MENTAT: that class of Imperial citizens trained for supreme accomplishments of logic. "Human computers." 
METAGLASS: glass grown as a high-temperature gas infusion in sheets of jasmium quartz. Noted for extreme tensile strength (about 450,000 kilos per square centimeter at two centimeters' thickness) and capacity as a selective radiation filter. 
MIHNA: the season for testing Fremen youths who wish admittance to manhood.
MINIMIC FILM: shigawire of one-micron diameter often used to transmit espionage and counterespionage data. 
MISH-MISH: apricots.
MISR: the historical Zensunni(Fremen) term for themselves: "The People." 
MISSIONARIA PROTECTIVA: the arm of the Bene Gesserit order charged with sowing infectious superstitions on primitive worlds, thus opening those regions to exploitation by the Bene Gesserit. (See Panoplia propheticus.) 
MONITOR: a ten-section space warcraft mounting heavy armor and shield protection. It is designed to be separated into its component sections for lift-off after planet-fall. 
MUAD'DIB: the adapted kangaroo mouse of Arrakis, a creature associated in the Fremen earth-spirit mythology with a design visible on the planet's second moon. This creature is admired by Fremen for its ability to survive in the open desert. 
MUDIR NAHYA: the Fremen name for Beast Rabban (Count Rabban of Lankiveil), the Harkonnen cousin who was siridar governor on Arrakis for many years. The name is often translated as "Demon Ruler." 
MUSHTAMAL: a small garden annex or garden courtyard. 
MUSKY: poison in a drink. (See Chaumurky.) 
MU ZEIN WALLAH!: Mu zein literally means "nothing good," and wallah is a reflexive terminal exclamation. In this traditional opening for a Fremen curse against an enemy, Wallah turns the emphasis back upon the words Mu zein, producing the meaning: "Nothing good, never good, good for nothing."

Na-: a prefix meaning "nominated" or "next in line." Thus: na-Baron means heir apparent to a barony.
NAIB: one who has sworn never to be taken alive by the enemy; traditional oath of a Fremen leader.
NEZHONI SCARF: the scarf-pad worn at the forehead beneath the stillsuit hood by married or "associated" Fremen women after birth of a son.
NOUKKERS: officers of the Imperial bodyguard who are related to the Emperor by blood. Traditional rank for sons of royal concubines.

OIL LENS: hufuf oil held in static tension by an enclosing force field within a viewing tube as part of a magnifying or other light-manipulation system. Because each lens element can be adjusted individually one micron at a time, the oil lens is considered the ultimate in accuracy for manipulating visible light. 
OPAFIRE: one of the rare opaline jewels of Hagal. 
ORANGE CATHOLIC BIBLE: the "Accumulated Book," the religious text produced by the Commission of Ecumenical Translators. It contains elements of most ancient religions, including the Maometh Saari, Mahayana Christianity, Zensunni Catholicism and Buddislamic traditions. Its supreme commandment is considered to be: "Thou shall not disfigure the soul." 
ORNITHOPTER (commonly: 'thopter): any aircraft capable of sustained wing-beat flight in the manner of birds. 
OUT-FREYN: Galach for "immediately foreign," that is: not of your immediate community, not of the select.

PALM LOCK: any lock or seal which may be opened on contact with the palm of the human hand to which it has been keyed. 
PAN: on Arrakis, any low-lying region or depression created by the subsiding of the underlying basement complex. (On planets with sufficient water, a pan indicates a region once covered by open water. Arrakis is believed to have at least one such area, although this remains open to argument.) 
PANOPLIA PROPHETICUS: term covering the infectious superstitions used by the Bene Gesserit to exploit primitive regions. (See Missionaria Protectiva.) 
PARACOMPASS: any compass that determines direction by local magnetic anomaly; used where relevant charts are available and where a planet's total magnetic field is unstable or subject to masking by severe magnetic storms.
PENTASHIELD: a five-layer shield-generator field suitable for small areas such as doorways or passages (large reinforcing shields become increasingly unstable with each successive layer) and virtually impassable to anyone not wearing a dissembler tuned to the shield codes. (See Prudence Door.) 
PLASTEEL: steel which has been stabilized with stravidium fibers grown into its crystal structure.
PLENISCENTA: an exotic green bloom of Ecaz noted for its sweet aroma.
POLING THE SAND: the art of placing plastic and fiber poles in the open desert wastes of Arrakis and reading the patterns etched on the poles by sandstorms as a clue to weather prediction. 
PORITRIN: third planet of Epsilon Alangue, considered by many Zensunni Wanderers as their planet of origin, although clues in their language and mythology show far more ancient planetary roots.
PORTYGULS: oranges.
PRANA (Prana-musculature): the body's muscles when considered as units for ultimate training. (See Bindu.) 
PRE-SPICE MASS: the stage of fungusoid wild growth achieved when water is flooded into the excretions of Little Makers. At this stage, the spice of Arrakis forms a characteristic "blow," exchanging the material from deep underground for the matter on the surface above it. This mass, after exposure to sun and air, becomes melange (See also Melange and Water of Life.) 
PROCES VERBAL: a semiformal report alleging a crime against the Imperium. Legally: an action falling between a loose verbal allegation and a formal charge of crime.
PROCTOR SUPERIOR: a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother who is also regional director of a B.G. school. (Commonly: Bene Gesserit with the Sight.) 
PRUDENCE DOOR or PRUDENCE BARRIER (idiomatically: pru-door or pru-barrier): any pentashield situated for the escape of selected persons under conditions of pursuit. (See Pentashield.) 
PUNDI RICE: a mutated rice whose grains, high in natural sugar, achieve lengths up to four centimeters; chief export of Caladan. 
PYONS: planet-bound peasants or laborers, one of the base classes under the Faufreluches. Legally: wards of the planet. 
PYRETIC CONSCIENCE: so-called "conscience of fire"; that inhibitory level touched by Imperial conditioning. (See Imperial conditioning.)

QANAT: an open canal for carrying irrigation water under controlled conditions through a desert. 
QIRTAIBA; see Ibn Qirtaiba.
QUIZARA TAFWID: Fremen priests (after Muad'Dib).

RACHAG: a caffeine-type stimulant from the yellow berries of akarso. (See Akarso.) 
RAMADHAN: ancient religious period marked by fasting and prayer; traditionally, the ninth month of the solar-lunar calendar. Fremen mark the observance according to the ninth meridian-crossing cycle of the first moon. 
RAZZIA: a semipiratical guerrilla raid.
RECATHS: body-function tubes linking the human waste disposal system to the cycling filters of a stillsuit. 
REPKIT: repair and replacement essentials for a stillsuit. 
RESIDUAL POISON: an innovation attributed to the Mentat Piter de Vries whereby the body is impregnated with a substance for which repeated antidotes must be administered. Withdrawal of the antidote at any time brings death.
REVEREND MOTHER: originally, a proctor of the Bene Gesserit, one who has transformed an "illuminating poison" within her body, raising herself to a higher state of awareness. Title adopted by Fremen for their own religious leaders who accomplished a similar "illumination." (See also Bene Gesserit and Water of Life.) 
RICHESE: fourth planet of Eridani A, classed with Ix as supreme in machine culture. Noted for miniaturization. (For a detailed study on how Richese and lx escaped the more severe effects of the Butlerian Jihad, see The Last Jihad by Sumer and Kautman.) 
RIMWALL: second upper Step of the protecting bluffs on the Shield Wall of Arrakis. (See Shield Wall.) 
RUH-SPIRIT: in Fremen belief, that part of the individual which is always rooted in (and capable of sensing) the metaphysical world. (See Alam al-Mithal.)

SADUS: judges. The Fremen title refers to holy judges, equivalent to saints.
SALUSA SECUNDUS: third planet of Gamma Waiping; designated Imperial Prison Planet after removal of the Royal Court to Kaitain. Salusa Secundus is homeworld of House Corrino, and the second stopping point in migrations of the Wandering Zensunni. Fremen tradition says they were slaves on S.S. for nine generations.
SANDCRAWLER: general term for machinery designed to operate on the Arrakis surface in hunting and collecting melange. 
SANDMASTER: general superintendent of spice operations. 
SANDRIDER: Fremen term for one who is capable of capturing and riding a sandworm.
SANDSNORK: breathing device for pumping surface air into a sandcovered stilltent.
SANDTIDE: idiomatic for a dust tide: the variation in level within certain dust-filled basins on Arrakis due to gravitational effects of sun and satellites. (See Tidal Dust Basin.) 
SANDWALKER: any Fremen trained to survive in the open desert. 
SANDWORM: See Shai-Hulud.
SAPHO: high-energy liquid extracted from barrier roots of Ecaz. Commonly used by Mentats who claim it amplifies mental powers. Users develop deep ruby stains on mouth and lips. 
SARDAUKAR: the soldier-fanatics of the Padishah Emperor. They were men from an environmental background of such ferocity that it killed six out of thirteen persons before the age of eleven. Their military training emphasized ruthlessness and a near-suicidal disregard for personal safety. They were taught from infancy to use cruelty as a standard weapon, weakening opponents with terror. At the apex of their sway over the affairs of the Universe, their swordsmanship was said to match that of the Ginaz tenth level and their cunning abilities at in-fighting were reputed to approach those of a Bene Gesserit adept. Any one of them was rated a match for any ten ordinary Landsraad military conscripts. By the time of Shaddam IV, while they were still formidable, their strength had been sapped by overconfidence, and the sustaining mystique of their warrior religion had been deeply undermined by cynicism. 
SARFA: the act of turning away from God.
SAYYADINA: feminine acolyte in the Fremen religious hierarchy. 
SCHLAG: animal native to Tupile once hunted almost to extinction for its thin, tough hide.
SECOND MOON: the smaller of the two satellites of Arrakis, noteworthy for the kangaroo mouse figure in its surface markings.
SELAMLIK: Imperial audience chamber.
SEMUTA: the second narcotic derivative (by crystal extraction) from burned residue of elacca wood. The effect (described as timeless, sustained ecstasy) is elicited by certain atonal vibrations referred to as semuta music.
SERVOK: clock-set mechanism to perform simple tasks; one of the limited "automatic" devices permitted after the Butlerian Jihad. 
SHAH-NAMA: the half-legendary First Book of the Zensunni Wanderers.
SHAI-HULUD: Sandworm of Arrakis, the "Old Man of the Desert," "Old Father Eternity," and "Grandfather of the Desert." Significantly, this name, when referred to in a certain tone or written with capital letters, designates the earth deity of Fremen hearth superstitions. Sandworms grow to enormous size (specimens longer than 400 meters have been seen in the deep desert) and live to great age unless slain by one of their fellows or drowned in water, which is poisonous to them. Most of the sand on Arrakis is credited to sandworm action. (See Little Maker.) 
SHARI-A: that part of the panoplia propheticus which sets forth the superstitious ritual. (See Missionaria Protectiva.)
SHADOUT: well-dipper, a Fremen honorific. 
SHAITAN: Satan.
SHIELD, DEFENSIVE: the protective field produced by a Holtzman generator. This field derives from Phase One of the suspensor-nullification effect. A shield will permit entry only to objects moving at slow speeds (depending on setting, this speed ranges from six to nine centimeters per second) and can be shorted out only by a shire-sized electric field. (See Lasgun.) 
SHIELD WALL: a mountainous geographic feature in the northern reaches of Arrakis which protects a small area from the full force of the planet's coriolis storms.
SHIGAWIRE: metallic extrusion of a ground vine. (Narvi narviium) grown only on Salusa Secundus and III Delta Kaising. It is noted for extreme tensile strength.
SIETCH: Fremen: "Place of assembly in time of danger. "Because the Fremen lived so long in peril, the term came by general usage to designate any cave warren inhabited by one of their tribal communities.
SIHAYA: Fremen: the desert springtime with religious overtones implying the time of fruitfulness and "the paradise to come." 
SINK: a habitable lowland area on Arrakis surrounded by high ground that protects it from the prevailing storms. 
SINKCHART: map of the Arrakis surface laid out with reference to the most reliable paracompass routes between places of refuge. (See Paracompass.) 
SIRAT: the passage in the O.C. Bible that describes human life as a journey across a narrow bridge (the Sirat) with "Paradise on my right. Hell on my left, and the Angel of Death behind." 
SLIP-TIP: any thin, short blade (often poison-tipped) for left-hand use in shield fighting.
SNOOPER, POISON: radiation analyzer within the olfactory spectrum and keyed to detect poisonous substances. 
SOLARI: official monetary unit of the Imperium, its purchasing power set at quatricentennial negotiations between the Guild, the Landsraad, and the Emperor.
SOLIDO: the three-dimensional image from a solido projector using 360-degree reference signals imprinted on a shigawire reel. Ixian solido projectors are commonly considered the best. 
SONDAGI; the fern tulip of Tupali.
SOO-SOO SOOK!: water-seller's cry on Arrakis. Sook is a market place. (See Ikhut-eigh!) 
SPACING GUILD: see Guild. 
SPICE: see Melange.
SPICE DRIVER: any Dune man who controls and directs movable machinery on the desert surface of Arrakis. 
SPICE FACTORY: see Sandcrawler.
SPOTTER CONTROL: the light ornithopter in a spice-hunting group charged with control of watch and protection. 
STILLSUIT: body-enclosing garment invented on Arrakis. Its fabric is a micro-sandwich performing functions of heat dissipation and filter for bodily wastes. Reclaimed moisture is made available by tube from catchpockets.
STILLTENT: small, scalable enclosure of micro-sandwich fabric designed to reclaim as potable water the ambient moisture discharged within it by the breath of its occupants. 
STUNNER: slow-pellet projectile weapon throwing a poison- or drug-tipped dart. Effectiveness limited by variations in shield settings and relative motion between target and projectile. 
SUBAKH UL KUHAR: "Are you well?": a Fremen greeting. 
SUBAKH UN NAR: "I am well. And you?": traditional reply. 
SUSPENSOR: secondary (low-drain) phase of a Holtzman field generator. It nullifies gravity within certain limits prescribed by relative mass and energy consumption.

TAHADDI AL-BURHAN: an ultimate test from which there can be no appeal (usually because it brings death or destruction).
TAHADDI CHALLENGE: Fremen challenge to mortal combat, usually to test some primal issue.
TAQWA: literally: "The price of freedom." Something of great value. That which a deity demands of a mortal (and the fear provoked by the demand).
TAU, THE: in Fremen terminology, that oneness of a sietch community enhanced by spice diet and especially the tau orgy of oneness elicited by drinking the Water of Life. 
TEST-MASHAD: any test in which honor (defined as spiritual standing) is at stake.
THUMPER: short stake with spring-driven clapper at one end. The purpose: to be driven into the sand and set "thumping" to summon shai-hulud. (See Maker hooks.) 
TIDAL DUST BASIN: any of the extensive depressions in the surface of Arrakis which have been filled with dust over the centuries and in which actual dust tides (see Sandtides) have been measured.
TLEILAX: lone planet of Thalim, noted as renegade training center for Mentats; source of "twisted" Mentats. 
T-P: idiomatic for telepathy.
TRAINING: when applied to Bene Gesserit, this otherwise common term assumes special meaning, referring to that conditioning of nerve and muscle (see Bindu and Prana) which is carried to the last possible notch permitted by natural function. 
TROOP CARRIER: any Guild ship designed specifically for transport of troops between planets.
TRUTHSAYER: a Reverend Mother qualified to enter truthtrance and detect insincerity or falsehood.
TRUTHTRANCE: semihypnotic trance induced by one of several "awareness spectrum" narcotics in which the petit betrayals of deliberate falsehood are apparent to the truthtrance observer. (Note: "awareness spectrum" narcotics are frequently fatal except to desensitized individuals capable of transforming the poison-configuration within their own bodies.)
TUPILE: so-called "sanctuary planet" (probably several planets) for defeated Houses of the Imperium. Location(s) known only to the Guild and maintained inviolate under the Guild Peace.

ULEMA: a Zensunni doctor of theology.
UMMA: one of the brotherhood of prophets. (A term of scorn in the Imperium, meaning any "wild" person given to fanatical prediction.) 
UROSHNOR: one of several sounds empty of general meaning and which Bene Gesserit implant within the psyches of selected victims for purposes of control. The sensitized person, hearing the sound, is temporarily immobilized. 
USUL: Fremen: "The base of the pillar."

VAROTA: famed maker of balisets; a native of Chusuk. 
VERITE: one of the Ecaz will-destroying narcotics. It renders a person incapable of falsehood.
VOICE: that combined training originated by the Bene Gesserit which permits an adept to control others merely by selected tone shadings of the voice.

WALI: an untried Fremen youth.
WALLACH IX: ninth planet of Laoujin, site of the Mother School of the Bene Gesserit.
WAR OF ASSASSINS: the limited form of warfare permitted under the Great Convention and the Guild Peace. The aim is to reduce involvement of innocent bystanders. Rules prescribe formal declarations of intent and restrict permissible weapons. 
WATER BURDEN: Fremen: a mortal obligation. 
WATERCOUNTERS: metal rings of different size, each designating a specific amount of water payable out of Fremen stores. Watercounters have profound significance (far beyond the idea of money) especially in birth, death, and courtship ritual. 
WATER DISCIPLINE: that harsh training which fits the inhabitants of Arrakis for existence there without wasting moisture.
WATERMAN: a Fremen consecrated for and charged with the ritual duties surrounding water and the Water of Life. 
WATER OF LIFE: an "illuminating" poison (see Reverend Mother). Specifically, that liquid exhalation of a sandworm (see Shai-hulud) produced at the moment of its death from drowning which is changed within the body of a Reverend Mother to become the narcotic used in the sietch tau orgy. An "awareness spectrum" narcotic.
WATERTUBE: any tube within a stillsuit or stilltent that carries reclaimed water into a catchpocket or from the catchpocket to the wearer.
WAY, BENE GESSERIT: use of the minutiae of observation. 
WEATHER SCANNER; a person trained in the special methods of predicting weather on Arrakis, including ability to pole the sand and read the wind patterns.
WEIRDING: idiomatic: that which partakes of the mystical or of witchcraft.
WINDTRAP: a device placed in the path of a prevailing wind and capable of precipitating moisture from the air caught within it, usually by a sharp and distinct drop in temperature within the trap.

YA HYA CHOUHADA: "Long live the fighters!" The Fedaykin battle cry. Ya (now) in this cry is augmented by the hya form (the ever-extended now). Chouhada (fighters) carries this added meaning of fighters against injustice. There is a distinction in this word that specifies the fighters are not struggling for anything, but are consecrated against a specific thing -- that alone. 
YALI: a Fremen's personal quarters within the sietch. 
YA! YA! YAWM!: Fremen chanting cadence used in time of deep ritual significance. Ya carries the root meaning of "Now pay attention!" The yawm form is a modified term calling for urgent immediacy. The chant is usually translated as "Now, hear this!"

ZENSUNNI: followers of a schismatic sect that broke away from the teachings of Maometh (the so-called "Third Muhammed") about 1381 B.G. The Zensunni religion is noted chiefly for its emphasis on the mystical and a reversion to "the ways of the fathers." Most scholars name Ali Ben Ohashi as leader of the original schism but there is some evidence that Ohashi may have been merely the male spokesman for his second wife, Nisai.


==================================
  ABC Amber LIT Converter v2.02
==================================

 Timothy Zahn

 Heir to the Empire

 

 Book 1 of the "Thrawn" trilogy

 

 Chapter 1

 "Captain Pellaeon?" a voice called down the portside crew pit through the hum of background conversation. "Message from the sentry line: the scoutships have just come out of lightspeed."

 Pellaeon, leaning over the shoulder of the man at theChimaera 's bridge engineering monitor, ignored the shout. "Trace this line for me," he ordered, tapping a light pen at the schematic on the display.

 The engineer threw a questioning glance up at him. "Sir...?"

 "I heard him," Pellaeon said. "You have an order, Lieutenant."

 "Yes, sir," the other said carefully, and keyed for the trace.

 "Captain Pellaeon?" the voice repeated, closer this time. Keeping his eyes on the engineering display, Pellaeon waited until he could hear the sound of the approaching footsteps. Then, with all the regal weight that fifty years spent in the Imperial Fleet gave to a man, he straightened up and turned.

 The young duty officer's brisk walk faltered; came to an abrupt halt. "Uh, sir" He looked into Pellaeon's eyes and his voice faded away.

 Pellaeon let the silence hang in the air for a handful of heartbeats, long enough for those nearest to notice. "This is not a cattle market in Shaum Hii, Lieutenant Tschel," he said at last, keeping his voice calm but icy cold. "This is the bridge of an Imperial Star Destroyer. Routine information is notrepeat,not simply shouted in the general direction of its intended recipient. Is that clear?"

 Tschel swallowed. "Yes, sir."

 Pellaeon held his eyes a few seconds longer, then lowered his head in a slight nod. "Now. Report."

 "Yes, sir." Tschel swallowed again. "We've just received word from the sentry ships, sir: the scouts have returned from their scan raid on the Obroa-skai system."

 "Very good," Pellaeon nodded. "Did they have any trouble?"

 "Only a little, sirthe natives apparently took exception to them pulling a dump of their central library system. The wing commander said there was some attempt at pursuit, but that he lost them."

 "I hope so," Pellaeon said grimly. Obroa-skai held a strategic position in the borderland regions, and intelligence reports indicated that theNewRepublic was making a strong bid for its membership and support. If they'd had armed emissary ships there at the time of the raid....

 Well, he'd know soon enough. "Have the wing commander report to the bridge ready room with his report as soon as the ships are aboard," he told Tschel. "And have the sentry line go to yellow alert. Dismissed."

 "Yes, sir." Spinning around with a reasonably good imitation of a proper military turn, the lieutenant headed back toward the communications console.

 Theyoung lieutenant... which was, Pellaeon thought with a trace of old bitterness, where the problem really lay. In the old daysat the height of the Empire's powerit would have been inconceivable for a man as young as Tschel to serve as a bridge officer aboard a ship like theChimaera . Now

 He looked down at the equally young man at the engineering monitor. Now, in contrast, theChimaera had virtually no one aboard except young men and women.

 Slowly, Pellaeon let his eyes sweep across the bridge, feeling the echoes of old anger and hatred twist through his stomach. There had been many commanders in the Fleet, he knew, who had seen the Emperor's original Death Star as a blatant attempt to bring the Empire's vast military power more tightly under his direct control, just as he'd already done with the Empire's political power. The fact that he'd ignored the battle station's proven vulnerability and gone ahead with a second Death Star had merely reinforced that suspicion. There would have been few in the Fleet's upper echelons who would have genuinely mourned its loss... if it hadn't, in its death throes, taken the Super Star DestroyerExecutor with it.

 Even after five years Pellaeon couldn't help but wince at the memory of that image: theExecutor , out of control, colliding with the unfinished Death Star and then disintegrating completely in the battle station's massive explosion. The loss of the ship itself had been bad enough; but the fact that it was theExecutor had made it far worse. That particular Super Star Destroyer had been Darth Vader's personal ship, and despite the Dark Lord's legendaryand often lethalcapriciousness, serving aboard it had long been perceived as the quick line to promotion.

 Which meant that when theExecutor died, so also did a disproportionate fraction of the best young and midlevel officers and crewers.

 The Fleet had never recovered from that fiasco. With theExecutor 's leadership gone, the battle had quickly turned into a confused rout, with several other Star Destroyers being lost before the order to withdraw had finally been given. Pellaeon himself, taking command when theChimera 's former captain was killed, had done what he could to hold things together; but despite his best efforts, they had never regained the initiative against the Rebels. Instead, they had been steadily pushed back... until they were here.

 Here, in what had once been the backwater of the Empire, with barely a quarter of its former systems still under nominal Imperial control. Here, aboard a Star Destroyer manned almost entirely by painstakingly trained but badly inexperienced young people, many of them conscripted from their home worlds by force or threat of force.

 Here, under the command of possibly the greatest military mind the Empire had ever seen.

 Pellaeon smileda tight, wolfish smileas he again looked around his bridge. No, the end of the Empire was not yet. As the arrogantly self-proclaimedNewRepublic would soon discover. He glanced at his watch. Two-fifteen. Grand Admiral Thrawn would be meditating in his command room now... and if Imperial procedure frowned on shouting across the bridge, it frowned even harder on interrupting a Grand Admiral's meditation by intercom. One spoke to him in person, or one did not speak to him at all. "Continue tracing those lines," Pellaeon ordered the engineering lieutenant as he headed for the door. "I'll be back shortly."

 The Grand Admiral's new command room was two levels below the bridge, in a space that had once housed the former commander's luxury entertainment suite. When Pellaeon had found Thrawnor rather, when the Grand Admiral had found himone of his first acts had been to take over the suite and convert it into what was essentially a secondary bridge.

 A secondary bridge, meditation room... and perhaps more. It was no secret aboard theChimaera that since the recent refitting had been completed the Grand Admiral had been spending a great deal of his time here. Whatwas secret was what exactly he did during those long hours.

 Stepping to the door, Pellaeon straightened his tunic and braced himself. Perhaps he was about to find out. "Captain Pellaeon to see Grand Admiral Thrawn," he announced. "I have informa"

 The door slid open before he'd finished speaking. Mentally preparing himself, Pellaeon stepped into the dimly lit entry room. He glanced around, saw nothing of interest, and started for the door to the main chamber, five paces ahead.

 A touch of air on the back of his neck was his only warning. "Captain Pellaeon," a deep, gravelly, catlike voice mewed into his ear.

 Pellaeon jumped and spun around, cursing both himself and the short, wiry creature standing less than half a meter away. "Blast it, Rukh," he snarled. "What do you think you're doing?"

 For a long moment Rukh just looked up at him, and Pellaeon felt a drop of sweat trickle down his back. With his large dark eyes, protruding jaw, and glistening needle teeth, Rukh was even more of a nightmare in the dimness than he was in normal lighting.

 Especially to someone like Pellaeon, who knew what Thrawn used Rukh and his fellow Noghri for.

 "I'm doing my job," Rukh said at last. He stretched his thin arm almost casually out toward the inner door, and Pellaeon caught just a glimpse of the slender assassin's knife before it vanished somehow into the Noghri's sleeve. His hand closed, then opened again, steel-wire muscles moving visibly beneath his dark gray skin. "You may enter."

 "Thankyou," Pellaeon growled. Straightening his tunic again, he turned back to the door. It opened at his approach, and he stepped through

 Into a softly lit art museum.

 He stopped short, just inside the room, and looked around in astonishment. The walls and domed ceiling were covered with flat paintings and planics, a few of them vaguely human-looking but most of distinctly alien origin. Various sculptures were scattered around, some freestanding, others on pedestals. In the center of the room was a double circle of repeater displays, the outer ring slightly higher than the inner ring. Both sets of displays, at least from what little Pellaeon could see, also seemed to be devoted to pictures of artwork.

 And in the center of the double circle, seated in a duplicate of the Admiral's Chair on the bridge, was Grand Admiral Thrawn.

 He sat motionlessly, his shimmery blue-black hair glinting in the dim light, his pale blue skin looking cool and subdued and very alien on his otherwise human frame. His eyes were nearly closed as he leaned back against the headrest, only a glint of red showing between the lids.

 Pellaeon licked his lips, suddenly unsure of the wisdom of having invaded Thrawn's sanctum like this. If the Grand Admiral decided to be annoyed....

 "Come in, Captain," Thrawn said, his quietly modulated voice cutting through Pellaeon's thoughts. Eyes still closed to slits, he waved a hand in a small and precisely measured motion. "What do you think?"

 "It's... very interesting, sir," was all Pellaeon could come up with as he walked over to the outer display circle.

 "All holographic, of course," Thrawn said, and Pellaeon thought he could hear a note of regret in the other's voice. "The sculptures and flats both. Some of them are lost; many of the others are on planets now occupied by the Rebellion."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded. "I thought you'd want to know, Admiral, that the scouts have returned from the Obroa-skai system. The wing commander will be ready for debriefing in a few minutes."

 Thrawn nodded. "Were they able to tap into the central library system?"

 "They got at least a partial dump," Pellaeon told him. "I don't know yet if they were able to complete itapparently, there was some attempt at pursuit. The wing commander thinks he lost them, though."

 For a moment Thrawn was silent. "No," he said. "No, I don't believe he has. Particularly not if the pursuers were from the Rebellion." Taking a deep breath, he straightened in his chair and, for the first time since Pellaeon had entered, opened his glowing red eyes.

 Pellaeon returned the other's gaze without flinching, feeling a small flicker of pride at the achievement. Many of the Emperor's top commanders and courtiers had never learned to feel comfortable with those eyes. Or with Thrawn himself, for that matter. Which was probably why the Grand Admiral had spent so much of his career out in the Unknown Regions, working to bring those still-barbaric sections of the galaxy under Imperial control. His brilliant successes had won him the title of Warlord and the right to wear the white uniform of Grand Admiralthe only nonhuman ever granted that honor by the Emperor.

 Ironically, it had also made him all the more indispensable to the frontier campaigns. Pellaeon had often wondered how the Battle of Endor would have ended if Thrawn, not Vader, had been commanding theExecutor . "Yes, sir," he said. "I've ordered the sentry line onto yellow alert. Shall we go to red?"

 "Not yet," Thrawn said. "We should still have a few minutes. Tell me, Captain, do you know anything about art?"

 "Ah... not very much," Pellaeon managed, thrown a little by the sudden change of subject. "I've never really had much time to devote to it."

 "You should make the time." Thrawn gestured to a part of the inner display circle to his right. "Saffa paintings," he identified them. "Circa 1550 to 2200, Pre-Empire Date. Note how the style changesright hereat the first contact with the Thennqora. Over there" he pointed to the left-hand wall "are examples of Paonidd extrassa art. Note the similarities with the early Saffa work, and also the mid-eighteenth-century Pre-Em Vaathkree flatsculp."

 "Yes, I see," Pellaeon said, not entirely truthfully. "Admiral, shouldn't we be?"

 He broke off as a shrill whistle split the air. "Bridge to Grand Admiral Thrawn," Lieutenant Tschel's taut voice called over the intercom. "Sir, we're under attack!"

 Thrawn tapped the intercom switch. "This is Thrawn," he said evenly. "Go to red alert, and tell me what we've got. Calmly, if possible."

 "Yes, sir." The muted alert lights began flashing, and Pellaeon could hear the sound of the klaxons baying faintly outside the room. "Sensors are picking up four New Republic Assault Frigates," Tschel continued, his voice tense but under noticeably better control. "Plus at least three wings of X-wing fighters. Symmetric cloud-vee formation, coming in on our scoutships' vector."

 Pellaeon swore under his breath. A single Star Destroyer, with a largely inexperienced crew, against four Assault Frigates and their accompanying fighters... "Run engines to full power," he called toward the intercom. "Prepare to make the jump to lightspeed." He took a step toward the door

 "Belay that jump order, Lieutenant," Thrawn said, still glacially calm. "TIE fighter crews to their stations; activate deflector shields."

 Pellaeon spun back to him. "Admiral"

 Thrawn cut him off with an upraised hand. "Come here, Captain," the Grand Admiral ordered. "Let's take a look, shall we?"

 He touched a switch; and abruptly, the art show was gone. Instead, the room had become a miniature bridge monitor, with helm, engine, and weapons readouts on the walls and double display circle. The open space had become a holographic tactical display; in one corner a flashing sphere indicated the invaders. The wall display nearest to it gave an ETA estimate of twelve minutes.

 "Fortunately, the scoutships have enough of a lead not to be in danger themselves," Thrawn commented. "So. Let's see what exactly we're dealing with. Bridge: order the three nearest sentry ships to attack."

 "Yes, sir."

 Across the room, three blue dots shifted out of the sentry line onto intercept vectors. From the corner of his eye Pellaeon saw Thrawn lean forward in his seat as the Assault Frigates and accompanying X-wings shifted in response. One of the blue dots winked out

 "Excellent," Thrawn said, leaning back in his seat. "That will do, Lieutenant. Pull the other two sentry ships back, and order the Sector Four line to scramble out of the invaders' vector."

 "Yes, sir," Tschel said, sounding more than a little confused.

 A confusion Pellaeon could well understand. "Shouldn't we at least signal the rest of the Fleet?" he suggested, hearing the tightness in his voice. "TheDeath's Head could be here in twenty minutes, most of the others in less than an hour."

 "The last thing we want to do right now is bring in more of our ships, Captain," Thrawn said. He looked up at Pellaeon, and a faint smile touched his lips. "After all, theremay be survivors, and we wouldn't want the Rebellion learning about us. Would we."

 He turned back to his displays. "Bridge: I want a twenty-degree port yaw rotationbring us flat to the invaders' vector, superstructure pointing at them. As soon as they're within the outer perimeter, the Sector Four sentry line is to re-form behind them and jam all transmissions."

 "Y-yes, sir. Sir?"

 "You don't have to understand, Lieutenant," Thrawn said, his voice abruptly cold. "Just obey."

 "Yes, sir."

 Pellaeon took a careful breath as the displays showed theChimaera rotating as per orders. "I'm afraid I don't understand, either, Admiral," he said. "Turning our superstructure toward them"

 Again, Thrawn stopped him with an upraised hand. "Watch and learn, Captain. That's fine, bridge: stop rotation and hold position here. Drop docking bay deflector shields, boost power to all others. TIE fighter squadrons: launch when ready. Head directly away from theChimaera for two kilometers, then sweep around in open cluster formation. Backfire speed, zonal attack pattern."

 He got an acknowledgment, then looked up at Pellaeon. "Do you understand now, Captain?"

 Pellaeon pursed his lips. "I'm afraid not," he admitted. "I see now that the reason you turned the ship was to give the fighters some exit cover, but the rest is nothing but a classic Marg Sabl closure maneuver. They're not going to fall for anything that simple."

 "On the contrary," Thrawn corrected coolly. "Not only will they fall for it, they'll be utterly destroyed by it. Watch, Captain. And learn."

 The TIE fighters launched, accelerating away from theChimaera and then leaning hard into etheric rudders to sweep back around it like the spray of some exotic fountain. The invading ships spotted the attackers and shifted vectors

 Pellaeon blinked. "What in the Empire are theydoing ?"

 "They're trying the only defense they know of against a Marg Sabl," Thrawn said, and there was no mistaking the satisfaction in his voice. "Or, to be more precise, the only defense they are psychologically capable of attempting." He nodded toward the flashing sphere. "You see, Captain, there's an Elom commanding that force... and Elomin simply cannot handle the unstructured attack profile of a properly executed Marg Sabl."

 Pellaeon stared at the invaders, still shifting into their utterly useless defense stance... and slowly it dawned on him what Thrawn had just done. "That sentry ship attack a few minutes ago," he said. "You were able to tell fromthat that those were Elomin ships?"

 "Learn about art, Captain," Thrawn said, his voice almost dreamy. "When you understand a species' art, you understand that species."

 He straightened in his chair. "Bridge: bring us to flank speed. Prepare to join the attack."

 An hour later, it was all over.

 

 The ready room door slid shut behind the wing commander, and Pellaeon gazed back at the map still on the display. "Sounds like Obroa-skai is a dead end," he said regretfully. "There's no way we'll be able to spare the manpower that much pacification would cost."

 "For now, perhaps," Thrawn agreed. "But only for now."

 Pellaeon frowned across the table at him. Thrawn was fiddling with a data card, rubbing it absently between finger and thumb, as he stared out the view port at the stars. A strange smile played about his lips. "Admiral?" he asked carefully.

 Thrawn turned his head, those glowing eyes coming to rest on Pellaeon. "It's the second piece of the puzzle, Captain," he said softly, holding up the data card. "The piece I've been searching for now for over a year."

 Abruptly, he turned to the intercom, jabbed it on. "Bridge, this is Grand Admiral Thrawn. Signal theDeath's Head; inform Captain Harbid we'll be temporarily leaving the Fleet. He's to continue making tactical surveys of the local systems and pulling data dumps wherever possible. Then set course for a planet called Myrkrthe nav computer has its location."

 The bridge acknowledged, and Thrawn turned back to Pellaeon. "You seem lost, Captain," he suggested. "I take it you've never heard of Myrkr."

 Pellaeon shook his head, trying without success to read the Grand Admiral's expression. "Should I have?"

 "Probably not. Most of those who have been smugglers, malcontents, and otherwise useless dregs of the galaxy."

 He paused, taking a measured sip from the mug at his elbowa strong Forvish ale, from the smell of itand Pellaeon forced himself to remain silent. Whatever the Grand Admiral was going to tell him, he was obviously going to tell it in his own way and time. "I ran across an offhand reference to it some seven years ago," Thrawn continued, setting his mug back down. "What caught my attention was the fact that, although the planet had been populated for at least three hundred years, both theOldRepublic and the Jedi of that time had always left it strictly alone." He cocked one blue-black eyebrow slightly. "What would you infer from that, Captain?"

 Pellaeon shrugged. "That it's a frontier planet, somewhere too far away for anyone to care about."

 "Very good, Captain. That was my first assumption, too... except that it's not. Myrkr is, in fact, no more than a hundred fifty light-years from hereclose to our border with the Rebellion and well within theOldRepublic 's boundaries." Thrawn dropped his eyes to the data card still in his hand. "No, the actual explanation is far more interesting. And far more useful."

 Pellaeon looked at the data card, too. "And that explanation became the first piece of this puzzle of yours?"

 Thrawn smiled at him. "Again, Captain, very good. Yes. Myrkror more precisely, one of its indigenous animalswas the first piece. The second is on a world called Wayland." He waved the data card. "A world for which, thanks to the Obroans, I finally have a location."

 "I congratulate you," Pellaeon said, suddenly tired of this game "May I ask just what exactly this puzzle is?"

 Thrawn smileda smile that sent a shiver up Pellaeon's back. "Why the only puzzle worth solving, of course," the Grand Admiral said softly. "The complete, total, and utter destruction of the Rebellion."

 

 Chapter 2

 "Luke?"

 The voice came softly but insistently. Pausing amid the familiar landscape of Tatooinefamiliar, yet oddly distortedLuke Skywalker turned to look.

 An equally familiar figure stood there watching him. "Hello, Ben," Luke said, his voice sounding sluggish in his ears. "Been a long time."

 "It has indeed," Obi-wan Kenobi said gravely. "And I'm afraid that it will be longer still until the next time. I've come to say good-bye, Luke."

 The landscape seemed to tremble; and abruptly, a small part of Luke's mind remembered that he was asleep. Asleep in his suite in theImperialPalace , and dreaming of Ben Kenobi.

 "No, I'm not a dream," Ben assured him, answering Luke's unspoken thought. "But the distances separating us have become too great for me to appear to you in any other way. Now, even this last path is being closed to me."

 "No," Luke heard himself say. "You can't leave us, Ben. We need you."

 Ben's eyebrows lifted slightly, and a hint of his old smile touched his lips. "You don't need me, Luke. You are a Jedi, strong in the Force." The smile faded, and for a moment his eyes seemed to focus on something Luke couldn't see. "At any rate," he added quietly, "the decision is not mine to make. I have lingered too long already, and can no longer postpone my journey from this life to what lies beyond."

 A memory stirred: Yoda on his deathbed, and Luke pleading with him not to die.Strong am I in the Force, the Jedi Master had told him softly.But not that strong.

 "It is the pattern of all life to move on," Ben reminded him. "You, too, will face this same journey one day." Again, his attention drifted away, then returned. "You are strong in the Force, Luke, and with perseverance and discipline you will grow stronger still." His gaze hardened. "But you must never relax your guard. The Emperor is gone, but the dark side is still powerful. Never forget that."

 "I won't," Luke promised.

 Ben's face softened, and again he smiled. "You will yet face great dangers, Luke," he said. "But you will also find new allies, at times and places where you expect them least."

 "New allies?" Luke echoed. "Who are they?"

 The vision seemed to waver and become fainter. "And now, farewell," Ben said, as if he hadn't heard the question. "I loved you as a son, and as a student, and as a friend. Until we meet again, may the Force be with you."

 "Ben!"

 But Ben turned, and the image faded... and in the dream, Luke knew he was gone.Then I am alone, he told himself.I am the last of the Jedi.

 He seemed to hear Ben's voice, faint and indistinct, as if from a great distance. "Not the last of the old Jedi, Luke. The first of the new."

 The voice trailed off into silence, and was gone... and Luke woke up.

 For a moment he just lay there, staring at the dim lights of theImperialCity playing across the ceiling above his bed and struggling through the sleep-induced disorientation. The disorientation, and an immense weight of sadness that seemed to fill the core of his being. First Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru had been murdered; then Darth Vader, his real father, had sacrificed his own life for Luke's; and now even Ben Kenobi's spirit had been taken away.

 For the third time, he'd been orphaned.

 With a sigh, he slid out from under the blankets and pulled on his robe and slippers. His suite contained a small kitchenette, and it took only a few minutes to fix himself a drink, a particularly exotic concoction Lando had introduced him to on his last visit to Coruscant. Then, attaching his lightsaber to his robe sash, he headed up to the roof.

 He had argued strongly against moving the center of theNewRepublic here to Coruscant; had argued even more strongly against setting up their fledgling government in the oldImperialPalace . The symbolism was all wrong, for one thing, particularly for a group whichin his opinionalready had a tendency to pay too much attention to symbols.

 But despite all its drawbacks, he had to admit that the view from the top of the Palace was spectacular.

 For a few minutes he stood at the roof's edge, leaning against the chest-high wrought stone railing and letting the cool night breeze ruffle his hair. Even in the middle of the night theImperialCity was a bustle of activity, with the lights of vehicles and streets intertwining to form a sort of flowing work of art. Overhead, lit by both the city lights and those of occasional airspeeders flitting through them, the low-lying clouds were a dim sculptured ceiling stretching in all directions, with the same apparent endlessness as the city itself. Far to the south, he could just make out theManaraiMountains , their snow-covered peaks illuminated, like the clouds, largely by reflected light from the city.

 He was gazing at the mountains when, twenty meters behind him, the door into the Palace was quietly opened.

 Automatically, his hand moved toward his lightsaber; but the motion had barely begun before it stopped. The sense of the creature coming through the doorway... "I'm over here, Threepio," he called.

 He turned to see C-3PO shuffling his way across the roof toward him, radiating the droid's usual mixture of relief and concern. "Hello, Master Luke," he said, tilting his head to look at the cup in Luke's hand. "I'm terribly sorry to disturb you."

 "That's all right," Luke told him. "I just wanted some fresh air, that's all."

 "Are you certain?" Threepio asked. "Though of course I don't mean to pry."

 Despite his mood, Luke couldn't help but smile. Threepio's attempts to be simultaneously helpful, inquisitive, and polite never quite came off. Not without looking vaguely comical, anyway. "I'm just a little depressed, I guess," he told the droid, turning back to gaze out over the city again. "Putting together a real, functioning government is a lot harder than I expected. Harder than most of the Council members expected, too." He hesitated. "Mostly, I guess I'm missing Ben tonight."

 For a moment Threepio was silent. "He was always very kind to me," he said at last. "And also to Artoo, of course."

 Luke raised his cup to his lips, hiding another smile behind it. "You have a unique perspective on the universe, Threepio," he said.

 From the corner of his eye, he saw Threepio stiffen. "I hope I didn't offend you, sir," the droid said anxiously. "That was certainly not my intent."

 "You didn't offend me," Luke assured him. "As a matter of fact, you might have just delivered Ben's last lesson to me."

 "I beg your pardon?"

 Luke sipped at his drink. "Governments and entire planets are important, Threepio. But when you sift everything down, they're all just made up of people."

 There was a brief pause. "Oh," Threepio said.

 "In other words," Luke amplified, "a Jedi can't get so caught up in matters of galactic importance that it interferes with his concern for individual people." He looked at Threepio and smiled. "Or for individual droids."

 "Oh. I see, sir." Threepio cocked his head toward Luke's cup. "Forgive me, sir... but may I ask what that is that you're drinking?"

 "This?" Luke glanced down at his cup. "It's just something Lando taught me how to make a while back."

 "Lando?" Threepio echoed, and there was no missing the disapproval in his voice. Programmed politeness or not, the droid had never really much cared for Lando.

 Which wasn't very surprising, given the circumstances of their first meeting. "Yes, but in spite of such a shady origin, it's really quite good," Luke told him. "It's called hot chocolate."

 "Oh. I see." The droid straightened up. "Well, then, sir. If you are indeed all right, I expect I should be on my way."

 "Sure. By the way, what made you come up here in the first place?"

 "Princess Leia sent me, of course," Threepio answered, clearly surprised that Luke would have to ask. "She said you were in some kind of distress."

 Luke smiled and shook his head. Leave it to Leia to find a way to cheer him up when he needed it. "Show-off," he murmured.

 "I beg your pardon, sir?"

 Luke waved a hand. "Leia's showing off her new Jedi skills, that's all. Proving that even in the middle of the night she can pick up on my mood."

 Threepio's head tilted. "She reallydid seem concerned about you, sir."

 "I know," Luke said. "I'm just joking."

 "Oh." Threepio seemed to think about that. "Shall I tell her you're all right, then?"

 "Sure," Luke nodded. "And while you're down there, tell her that she should quit worrying about me and get herself back to sleep. Those bouts of morning sickness she still gets are bad enough when sheisn't worn-out tired."

 "I'll deliver the message, sir," Threepio said.

 "And," Luke added quietly, "tell her I love her."

 "Yes, sir. Good night, Master Luke."

 "Good night, Threepio."

 He watched the droid go, a fresh flow of depression threatening again to drag him down. Threepio wouldn't understand, of courseno one on the Provisional Council had understood, either. But for Leia, just over three months pregnant, to be spending the bulk of her timehere ...

 He shivered, and not from the cool night air.This place is strong with the dark side. Yoda had said that of the cave on Dagobahthe cave where Luke had gone on to fight a lightsaber duel with a Darth Vader who had turned out to be Luke himself. For weeks afterward the memory of the sheer power and presence of the dark side had haunted his thoughts; only much later had he finally realized that Yoda's primary reason for the exercise had been to show him how far he still had to go.

 Still, he'd often wondered how the cave had come to be the way it had. Wondered whether perhaps someone or something strong in the dark side had once lived there.

 As the Emperor had once lived here....

 He shivered again. The really maddening part of it was that hecouldn't sense any such concentration of evil in the Palace. The Council had made a point of asking him about that, in fact, when they'd first considered moving operations here to theImperialCity . He'd had to grit his teeth and tell them that, no, there seemed to be no residual effects of the Emperor's stay.

 But just because he couldn't sense it didn't necessarily mean it wasn't there.

 He shook his head.Stop it, he ordered himself firmly. Jumping at shadows wasn't going to gain him anything but paranoia. His recent nightmares and poor sleep were probably nothing more than the stresses of watching Leia and the others struggling to turn a military-oriented rebellion into a civilian-based government. Certainly Leia would never have agreed to come anywhere near this place if she'd had any doubts herself about it.

 Leia.

 With an effort, Luke forced his mind to relax and let his Jedi senses reach outward. Halfway across the palace's upper section he could feel Leia's drowsy presence. Her presence, and that of the twins she carried within her.

 For a moment he held the partial contact, keeping it light enough to hopefully not wake her any further, marveling again at the strange feel of the unborn children within her. The Skywalker heritage was indeed with them; the fact that he could sense them at all implied they must be tremendously strong in the Force.

 At least, he assumed that was what it meant. It had been something he'd hoped he would someday have a chance to ask Ben about.

 And now that chance was gone.

 Fighting back sudden tears, he broke the contact. His mug felt cold against his hand; swallowing the rest of the chocolate, he took one last look around. At the city, at the clouds... and, in his mind's eye, at the stars that lay beyond them. Stars, around which revolved planets, upon which lived people. Billions of people. Many of them still waiting for the freedom and light theNewRepublic had promised them.

 He closed his eyes against the bright lights and the equally bright hopes. There was, he thought wearily, no magic wand that could make everything better.

 Not even for a Jedi.

 

 Threepio shuffled his way out of the room, and with a tired sigh Leia Organa Solo settled back against the pillows.Half a victory is better than none, the old saying crossed her mind.

 The old saying she'd never believed for a minute. Half a victory, to her way of thinking, was also half a defeat.

 She sighed again, feeling the touch of Luke's mind. His encounter with Threepio had lightened his dark mood, as she'd hoped it would; but with the droid gone, the depression was threatening to overtake him again.

 Perhaps she should go to him herself. See if she could get him to talk through whatever it was that had been bothering him for the past few weeks.

 Her stomach twisted, just noticeably. "It's all right," she soothed, rubbing her hand gently across her belly. "It's all right. I'm just worried about your Uncle Luke, that's all."

 Slowly, the twisting eased. Picking up the half-filled glass on the nightstand, Leia drank it down, trying not to make a face. Warm milk was pretty far down on her list of favorite drinks, but it had proved to be one of the fastest ways to soothe these periodic twinges from her digestive tract. The doctors had told her that the worst of her stomach troubles should begin disappearing any day now. She hoped rather fervently that they were right.

 Faintly, from the next room, came the sound of footsteps. Quickly, Leia slapped the glass back on the nightstand with one hand as she hauled the blankets up to her chin with the other. The bedside light was still glowing, and she reached out with the Force to try and turn it off.

 The lamp didn't even flicker. Gritting her teeth, she tried again; again, it didn't work. Still not enough fine control over the Force, obviously, for something as small as a light switch. Untangling herself from the blankets, she tried to make a lunge for it.

 Across the room, the side door opened to reveal a tall woman in a dressing robe. "Your Highness?" she called softly, brushing her shimmering white hair back from her eyes. "Are you all right?"

 Leia sighed and gave up. "Come on in, Winter. How long have you been listening at the door?"

 "I haven't been listening," Winter said as she glided into the room, sounding almost offended that Leia would even suggest such a thing of her. "I saw the light coming from under your door and thought you might need something."

 "I'm fine," Leia assured her, wondering if this woman would ever cease to amaze her. Awakened in the middle of the night, dressed in an old robe with her hair in total disarray, Winter still looked more regal than Leia herself could manage on her best days. She'd lost track of the number of times when, as children together on Alderaan, some visitor to the Viceroy's court had automatically assumed Winter was, in fact, the Princess Leia.

 Winter had probably not lost track, of course. Anyone who could remember whole conversations verbatim should certainly be able to reconstruct the number of times she'd been mistaken for a royal princess.

 Leia had often wondered what the rest of the Provisional Council members would think if they knew that the silent assistant sitting beside her at official meetings or standing beside her at unofficial corridor conversations was effectively recording every word they said. Some of them, she suspected, wouldn't like it at all.

 "Can I get you some more milk, Your Highness?" Winter asked. "Or some crackers?"

 "No, thank you," Leia shook her head. "My stomach isn't really bothering me at the moment. It's... well, you know. It's Luke."

 Winter nodded. "Same thing that's been bothering him for the past nine weeks?"

 Leia frowned. "Has it been that long?"

 Winter shrugged. "You've been busy," she said with her usual knack for diplomacy.

 "Tell me about it," Leia said dryly. "I don't know, WinterI really don't. He told Threepio that he misses Ben Kenobi, but I can tell that's not all of it."

 "Perhaps it has something to do with your pregnancy," Winter suggested. "Nine weeks ago would put it just about right."

 "Yes, I know," Leia agreed. "But that's also about the time Mon Mothma and Admiral Ackbar were pushing to move the government seat here to Coruscant. Also about the time we started getting those reports from the borderlands about some mysterious tactical genius having taken command of the Imperial Fleet." She held her hands out, palms upward. "Take your pick."

 "I suppose you'll just have to wait until he's ready to talk to you." Winter considered. "Perhaps Captain Solo will be able to draw him out when he returns."

 Leia squeezed thumb and forefinger together, a wave of anger-filled loneliness sweeping over her. For Han to have gone out on yet another of these stupid contact missions, leaving her all alone

 The flash of anger disappeared, dissolving into guilt. Yes, Han was gone again; but even when he was here it seemed sometimes like they hardly saw each other. With more and more of her time being eaten up by the enormous task of setting up a new government, there were days when she barely had time to eat, let alone see her husband.

 But that's my job,she reminded herself firmly; and it was a job that, unfortunately, only she could do. Unlike virtually all the others in theAlliance hierarchy, she had had extensive training in both the theory and the more practical aspects of politics. She'd grown up in the Royal House of Alderaan, learning about systemwide rule from her foster fatherlearning it so well that while still in her teens she was already representing him in the Imperial Senate. Without her expertise, this whole thing could easily collapse, particularly in these critical early stages of theNewRepublic 's development. A few more monthsjust a few more monthsand she'd be able to ease off a little. She'd make it all up to Han then.

 The guilt faded. But the loneliness remained.

 "Maybe," she told Winter. "In the meantime, we'd better both get some sleep. We have a busy day tomorrow."

 Winter arched her eyebrows slightly. "There's another kind?" she asked with a touch of Leia's earlier dryness.

 "Now, now," Leia admonished, mock-seriously. "You're far too young to become a cynic. I mean it, nowoff to bed with you."

 "You're sure you don't need anything first?"

 "I'm sure. Go on, scat."

 "All right. Good night, Your Highness."

 She glided out, closing the door behind her. Sliding down flat onto the bed, Leia readjusted the blankets over her and shifted the pillows into a more or less comfortable position. "Good night to you two, too," she said softly to her babies, giving her belly another gentle rub. Han had suggested more than once that anyone who talked to her own stomach was slightly nuts. But then, she suspected that Han secretly believedeveryone was slightly nuts.

 She missed him terribly.

 With a sigh, she reached over to the nightstand and turned off the light. Eventually, she fell asleep.

 

 A quarter of the way across the galaxy, Han Solo sipped at his mug and surveyed the semiorganized chaos flowing all around him.Didn't we, he quoted to himself,just leave this party?

 Still, it was nice to know that, in a galaxy busily turning itself upside down, there were some things that never changed. The band playing off in the corner was different, and the upholstery in the booth was noticeably less comfortable; but apart from that, the Mos Eisley cantina looked exactly the same as it always had before. The same as it had looked the day he'd first met Luke Skywalker and Obi-wan Kenobi.

 It felt like a dozen lifetimes ago.

 Beside him, Chewbacca growled softly. "Don't worry, he'll be here," Han told him. "It's just Dravis. I don't think he's ever been on time for anything in his whole life."

 Slowly, he let his eyes drift over the crowd. No, he amended to himself, therewas one other thing different about the cantina: virtually none of the other smugglers who had once frequented the place were anywhere to be seen. Whoever had taken over what was left of Jabba the Hutt's organization must have moved operations off Tatooine. Turning to peer toward the cantina's back door, he made a mental note to ask Dravis about it.

 He was still gazing off to the side when a shadow fell across the table. "Hello, Solo," a snickering voice said.

 Han gave himself a three-count before turning casually to face the voice. "Well, hello, Dravis," he nodded. "Long time no see. Have a seat."

 "Sure," Dravis said with a grin. "Soon as you and Chewie both put your hands on the table."

 Han gave him an injured look. "Oh, comeon ," he said, reaching up to cradle his mug with both hands. "You think I'd invite you all the way here just to shoot at you? We're old buddies, remember?"

 "Sure we are," Dravis said, throwing Chewbacca an appraising glance as he sat down. "Or at least we used to be. But I hear you've gone respectable."

 Han shrugged eloquently. "Respectable's such a vague word.

 Dravis cocked an eyebrow. "Oh, well, then let's be specific," he said sardonically. "I hear you joined the Rebel Alliance, got made a general, married a former Alderaanian princess, and got yourself a set of twins on the way."

 Han waved a self-deprecating hand. "Actually, I resigned the general part a few months back."

 Dravis snorted. "Forgive me. So what's all this about? Some kind of warning?"

 Han frowned. "What do you mean?"

 "Don't play innocent, Solo," Dravis said, the banter gone from his tone. "New Republic replaces Empireall fine and sweet and dandy, but you know as well as I do that it's all the same to smugglers. So if this is an official invitation to cease and desist our business activities, let me laugh in your face and get out of here." He started to get up.

 "It's nothing like that," Han told him. "As a matter of fact, I was hoping to hire you."

 Dravis froze, halfway up. "What?" he asked warily.

 "You heard right," Han said. "We're looking to hire smugglers."

 Slowly, Dravis sat back down. "Is this something to do with your fight with the Empire?" he demanded. "Because if it is"

 "It isn't," Han assured him. "There's a whole spiel that goes along with this, but what it boils down to is that theNewRepublic is short of cargo ships at the moment, not to mention experienced cargo ship pilots. If you're looking to earn some quick and honest money, this would be a good time to do it."

 "Uh-huh." Dravis leaned back in his chair, draping an arm over the seat back as he eyed Han suspiciously. "So what's the catch?"

 Han shook his head. "No catch. We need ships and pilots to get interstellar trade going again. You've got 'em. That's all there is to it."

 Dravis seemed to think it over. "So why work for you and your pittance directly?" he demanded. "Why can't we just smuggle the stuff and make more per trip?"

 "You could do that," Han conceded. "But only if your customers had to pay the kind of tariffs that would make hiring smugglers worthwhile. In this case" he smiled "they won't."

 Dravis glared at him. "Oh, comeon , Solo. A brand-new government, hard-pressed like crazy for cashand you want me to believe they won't be piling tariffs on top of each other?"

 "Believe anything you want," Han said, letting his own tone go frosty. "Go ahead and try it, too. But when you're convinced, give me a call."

 Dravis chewed at the inside of his cheek, his eyes never leaving Han's. "You know, Solo," he said thoughtfully, "I wouldn't have come if I didn't trust you. Well, maybe I was curious, too, to see what scam you were pulling. And I might be willing to believe you on this, at least enough to check it out myself. But I'll tell you right up front that a lot of others in my group won't."

 "Why not?"

 "Because you've gone respectable, that's why. Oh, don't give me that hurt lookthe simple fact is that you've been out of the business too long to even remember what it's like. Profits are what drives a smuggler, Solo. Profits and excitement."

 "So what are you going to do instead, operate in the Imperial sectors?" Han countered, trying hard to remember all those lessons in diplomacy that Leia had given him.

 Dravis shrugged. "It pays," he said simply.

 "For now, maybe," Han reminded him. "But their territory's been shrinking for five years straight, and it's going to keep getting smaller. We're just about evenly gunned now, you know, and our people are more motivated and a lot better trained than theirs."

 "Maybe." Dravis cocked an eyebrow. "But maybe not. I hear rumors that there's someone new in charge out there. Someone who's been giving you a lot of troublelike in the Obroa-skai system, for instance? I hear you lost an Elomin task force out there just a little while ago. Awfully sloppy, losing a whole task force like that."

 Han gritted his teeth. "Just remember that anybody who givesus trouble is going to giveyou trouble, too." He leveled a finger at the other. "And if you think theNewRepublic is hungry for cash, think of how hungry the Empire must be right now."

 "It's certainly an adventure," Dravis agreed easily, getting to his feet. "Well, it really was nice seeing you again, Solo, but I gotta go. Say hi to your princess for me."

 Han sighed. "Just give your people our offer, okay?"

 "Oh, I will. Might even be some who'll take you up on it. You never can tell."

 Han nodded. It was, really, all he could have expected out of this meeting. "One other thing, Dravis. Who exactly is the big fish in the pond now that Jabba's gone?"

 Dravis eyed him thoughtfully. "Well... I guess it's not really a secret," he decided. "Mind you, there aren't any really official numbers. But if I were betting, I'd put my money on Talon Karrde."

 Han frowned. He'd heard of Karrde, of course, but never with any hint that his organization was even in the top ten, let alone the one on top. Either Dravis was wrong, or Karrde was the type who believed in keeping a low profile. "Where can I find him?"

 Dravis smiled slyly. "You'd like to know that, wouldn't you? Maybe someday I'll tell you."

 "Dravis"

 "Gotta go. See you around, Chewie."

 He started to turn; paused. "Oh, by the way. You might tell your pal over there that he's got to be the worst excuse for a backup man I've ever seen. Just thought you'd like to know." With another grin, he turned again and headed back into the crowd.

 Han grimaced as he watched him go. Still, at least Dravis had been willing to turn his back on them as he left. Some of the other smugglers he'd contacted hadn't even trusted him that far. Progress, sort of.

 Beside him, Chewbacca growled something derogatory. "Well, what do you expect with Admiral Ackbar sitting on the Council?" Han shrugged. "The Calamarians were death on smugglers even before the war, and everyone knows it. Don't worry, they'll come around. Some of them, anyway. Dravis can blather all he wants about profit and excitement; but you offer them secure maintenance facilities, no Jabba-style skimming, and no one shooting at them, and they'll get interested. Come on, let's get going."

 He slid out of the booth and headed for the bar and the exit just visible beyond it. Halfway across, he stopped at one of the other booths and looked down at its lone occupant. "I've got a message for you," he announced. "I'm supposed to tell you that you're the worst excuse for a backup man that Dravis has ever seen."

 WedgeAntilles grinned up at him as he slid out from behind the table. "I thought that was the whole idea," he said, running his fingers through his black hair.

 "Yes, but Dravis didn't." Though privately, Han would be the first to admit that Dravis had a point. As far as he was concerned, the only times Wedgedidn't stick out like a lump on plate glass was when he was sitting in the cockpit of an X-wing blasting TIE fighters into dust. "So where's Page, anyway?" he asked, glancing around.

 "Right here, sir," a quiet voice said at his shoulder.

 Han turned. Beside them had appeared a medium-height, medium-build, totally nondescript-looking man. The kind of man no one would really notice; the kind who could blend invisibly into almost any surroundings.

 Which had, again, been the whole idea. "You see anything suspicious?" Han asked him.

 Page shook his head. "No backup troops; no weapons other than his blaster. This guy must have genuinely trusted you."

 "Yeah. Progress." Han took one last look around. "Let's get going. We're going to be late enough back to Coruscant as it is. And I want to swing through the Obroa-skai system on the way."

 "That missing Elomin task force?" Wedge asked.

 "Yeah," Han said grimly. "I want to see if they've figured out what happened to it yet. And if we're lucky, maybe get some idea of who did it to them."

 

 Chapter 3

 The fold-out table in his private office was set, the food was ready to serve, and Talon Karrde was just pouring the wine when the tap came on his door. As always, his timing was perfect. "Mara?" he called.

 "Yes," the young woman's voice confirmed through the door. "You asked me to join you for dinner."

 "Yes. Please come in."

 The door slid open, and with her usual catlike grace Mara Jade walked into the room. "You didn't say what" her green eyes flicked to the elaborately set table "this was all about," she finished, her tone just noticeably different. The green eyes came back to him, cool and measuring.

 "No, it's not what you're thinking," Karrde assured her, motioning her to the chair opposite his. "This is a business mealno more, no less."

 From behind his desk came a sound halfway between a cackle and a purr. "That's right, Dranga business meal," Karrde said, turning toward the sound. "Come on, out with you."

 The vornskr peered out from around the edge of the desk, its front paws gripping the carpet, its muzzle close to the floor as if on the hunt. "I said out with you," Karrde repeated firmly, pointing toward the open door behind Mara. "Come on, your dish has been set up in the kitchen. Sturm's already therechances are he's eaten half your supper by now."

 Reluctantly, Drang slunk out from behind the desk, cackle/purring forlornly to himself as he padded toward the door. Don't give me that poor-little-me act," Karrde chided, picking a piece of braised bruallki from the serving dish. "Herethis should cheer you up."

 He tossed the food in the general direction of the doorway. Drang's lethargy vanished in a single coiled-spring leap as he snagged the mouthful in midair. "There," Karrde called after him. "Now go and enjoy your supper."

 The vornskr trotted out. "All right," Karrde said, shifting his attention back to Mara. "Where were we?"

 "You were telling me this was a business meal," she said, her voice still a little cool as she slid into the seat across from his and surveyed the table. "It's certainly the nicest business meal I've had in quite a while."

 "Well, that's the point, really," Karrde told her, sitting down himself and reaching over to the serving tray. "I think it's occasionally good for us to remember that being a smuggler doesn't necessarily require one to be a barbarian, too."

 "Ah," she nodded, sipping at her wine. "And I'm sure most of your people are so very grateful for that reminder."

 Karrde smiled. So much, he thought, for the unusual setting and scenario throwing her off balance. He should have known that particular gambit wouldn't work on someone like Mara. "Itdoes often make for an interesting evening," he agreed. "Particularly" he eyed her "when discussing a promotion."

 A flicker of surprise, almost too fast to see, crossed her face. "A promotion?" she echoed carefully.

 "Yes," he said, scooping a serving of bruallki onto her plate and setting it in front of her. "Yours, to be precise."

 The wary look was back in her eyes. "I've only been with the group for six months, you know."

 "Five and a half, actually," he corrected her. "But time has never been as important to the universe as ability and results... and your ability and results have been quite impressive."

 She shrugged, her red-gold hair shimmering with the movement. "I've been lucky," she said.

 "Luck is certainly part of it," he agreed. "On the other hand, I've found that what most people call luck is often little more than raw talent combined with the ability to make the most of opportunities."

 He turned back to the bruallki, dished some onto his own plate. "Then there's your talent for starship piloting, your ability to both give and accept orders" he smiled slightly, gesturing to the table "and your ability to adapt to unusual and unexpected situations. All highly useful talents for a smuggler."

 He paused, but she remained silent. Evidently, somewhere in her past she'd also learned when not to ask questions. Another useful talent. "The bottom line, Mara, is that you're simply too valuable to waste as a backup or even as a line operator," he concluded. "What I'd like to do is to start grooming you toward eventually becoming my second in command."

 There was no chance of mistaking her surprise this time. The green eyes went momentarily wide, and then narrowed. "What exactly would my new duties consist of?" she asked.

 "Traveling with me, mostly," he said, taking a sip of wine. "Watching me set up new business, meeting with some of our long-term customers so that they can get to know youthat sort of thing."

 She was still suspicioushe could tell that from her eyes. Suspicious that the offer was a smoke screen to mask some more personal request or demand on his part. "You don't have to answer now," he told her. "Think about it, or talk to some of the others who've been with the organization longer." He looked her straight in the eye. "They'll tell you that I don't lie to my people."

 Her lip twisted. "So I've heard," she said, her voice going noncommittal again. "But bear in mind that if you give me that kind of authority, Iam going to use it. There's some revamping of the whole organizational structure"

 She broke off as the intercom on his desk warbled. "Yes?" Karrde called toward it.

 "It's Aves," a voice said. "Thought you'd like to know we've got company: an Imperial Star Destroyer just made orbit."

 Karrde glanced at Mara as he got to his feet. "Any make on it yet?" he asked, dropping his napkin beside his plate and stepping around the desk to where he could see the screen.

 "They're not exactly broadcasting ID sigs these days," Aves shook his head. "The lettering on the side is hard to read at this distance, but Torve's best guess is that it's theChimaera ."

 "Interesting," Karrde murmured. Grand Admiral Thrawn himself. "Have they made any transmissions?"

 "None that we've picked upwait a minute. Looks like... yesthey're launching a shuttle. Make that two shuttles. Projected landing point..." Aves frowned at something offscreen for a moment. "Projected landing point somewhere here in the forest."

 Out of the corner of his eyes, Karrde saw Mara stiffen a bit. "Not in any of the cities around the edge?" he asked Aves.

 "No, it's definitely the forest. No more than fifty kilometers from here, either."

 Karrde rubbed his forefinger gently across his lower lip, considering the possibilities. "Still only two shuttles?"

 "That's all so far." Aves was starting to look a little nervous. "Should I call an alert?"

 "On the contrary. Let's see if they need any help. Give me a hailing channel."

 Aves opened his mouth; closed it again. "Okay," he said, taking a deep breath and tapping something offscreen. "You have hailing."

 "Thank you. Imperial Star DestroyerChimaera , this is Talon Karrde. May I be of any assistance to you?"

 "No response," Aves muttered. "You think maybe they didn't want to be noticed?"

 "If you don't want to be noticed, you don't use a Star Destroyer," Karrde pointed out. "No, they're most likely busy running my name through ship's records. Be interesting to see some day just what they have on me. If anything." He cleared his throat. "Star DestroyerChimaera , this is"

 Abruptly, Aves's face was replaced by that of a middle-aged man wearing a captain's insignia. "This is Captain Pellaeon of theChimaera ," he said brusquely. "What is it you want?"

 "Merely to be neighborly," Karrde told him evenly. "We track two of your shuttles coming down, and wondered if you or Grand Admiral Thrawn might require any assistance."

 The skin around Pellaeon's eyes tightened, just a bit. "Who?"

 "Ah," Karrde nodded, allowing a slight smile. "Of course. I haven't heard of Grand Admiral Thrawn, either. Certainly not in connection with theChimaera . Or with some intriguing information raids on several systems in the Paonnid/Obroa-skai region, either."

 The eyes tightened a little more. "You're very well informed, Mr. Karrde," Pellaeon said, his voice silky but with menace lurking beneath it. "One might wonder how a lowly smuggler would come by such information."

 Karrde shrugged. "My people hear stories and rumors; I take the pieces and put them together. Much the same way your own intelligence units operate, I imagine. Incidentally, if your shuttles are planning to put down in the forest, you need to warn the crews to be careful. There are several dangerous predator species living here, and the high metal content of the vegetation makes sensor readings unreliable at best."

 "Thank you for the advice," Pellaeon said, his voice still frosty. "But they won't be staying long."

 "Ah," Karrde nodded, running the possibilities through his mind. There were, fortunately, not all that many of them. "Doing a little hunting, are they?"

 Pellaeon favored him with a slightly indulgent smile. "Information on Imperial activities is very expensive. I'd have thought a man in your line of work would know that."

 "Indeed," Karrde agreed, watching the other closely. "But occasionally one finds bargains. It's the ysalamiri you're after, isn't it?"

 The other's smile froze. "There are no bargains to be had here, Karrde," he said after a moment, his voice very soft. "Andexpensive can also meancostly ."

 "True," Karrde said. "Unless, of course, it's traded for something equally valuable. I presume you're already familiar with the ysalamiri's rather unique characteristicsotherwise, you wouldn't be here. Can I assume you're also familiar with the somewhat esoteric art of safely getting them off their tree branches?"

 Pellaeon studied him, suspicion all over his face. "I was under the impression that ysalamiri were no more than fifty centimeters long and not predatory."

 "I wasn't referring toyour safety, Captain," Karrde told him. I meant theirs. You can't just pull them off their branches, not without killing them. An ysalamir in this stage is sessileits claws have elongated to the point where they've essentially grown directly into the core of the branch it inhabits."

 "And you, I suppose, know the proper way to do it?"

 "Some of my people do, yes," Karrde told him. "If you'd like, I could send one of them to rendezvous with your shuttles. The technique involved isn't especially difficult, but it reallydoes have to be demonstrated."

 "Of course," Pellaeon said, heavily sardonic. "And the fee for this esoteric demonstration...?"

 "No fee, Captain. As I said earlier, we're just being neighborly."

 Pellaeon cocked his head slightly to one side. "Your generosity will be remembered." For a moment he held Karrde's gaze; and there was no mistaking the twin-edged meaning to the words. If Karrde was planning some sort of betrayal, it too would be remembered. "I'll signal my shuttles to expect your expert."

 "He'll be there. Good-bye, Captain."

 Pellaeon reached for something off-camera, and once again Ave's face replaced his on the screen. "You get all that?" Karrde asked the other.

 Aves nodded. "Dankin and Chin are already warming up one of the Skiprays."

 "Good. Have them leave an open transmission; and I'll want to see them as soon as they're back."

 "Right." The display clicked off.

 Karrde stepped away from the desk, glanced once at Mara, and reseated himself at the table. "Sorry for the interruption," he said conversationally, watching her out of the corner of his eye as he poured himself some more wine.

 Slowly, the green eyes came back from infinity; and as she looked at him, the muscles of her face eased from their deathlike rigidness. "You really not going to charge them for this?" she asked, reaching a slightly unsteady hand for her own wine. "They'd certainly makeyou pay if you wanted something. That's about all the Empire really cares about these days, money."

 He shrugged. "We get to have our people watching them from the moment they set down to the moment they lift off. That seems an adequate fee to me."

 She studied him. "You don't believe they're here just to pick up ysalamiri, do you?"

 "Not really." Karrde took a bite of his bruallki. "At least, not unless there's a use for the things that we don't know about. Coming all the way out here to collect ysalamiri is a bit of an overkill to use against a single Jedi."

 Mara's eyes again drifted away. "Maybe it's not Skywalker they're after," she murmured. "Maybe they've found some more Jedi."

 "Seems unlikely," Karrde said, watching her closely. The emotion in her voice when she'd said Luke Skywalker's name... "The Emperor supposedly made a clean sweep of them in the early days of the New Order. Unless," he added as another thought occurred to him, "they've perhaps found Darth Vader."

 "Vader died on the Death Star," Mara said. "Along with the Emperor."

 "That's the story, certainly"

 "He died there," Mara cut him off, her voice suddenly sharp.

 "Of course," Karrde nodded. It had taken him five months of close observation, but he'd finally pinned down the handful of subjects guaranteed to trigger strong responses from the woman. The late Emperor was among them, as was the pre-Endor Empire.

 And at the opposite end of the emotional spectrum was Luke Skywalker. "Still," he continued thoughtfully, "if a Grand Admiral thinks he has a good reason to carry ysalamiri aboard his ships, we might do well to follow his lead."

 Abruptly, Mara's eyes focused on him again. "What for?" she demanded.

 "A simple precaution," Karrde said. "Why so vehement?"

 He watched as she fought a brief internal battle. "It seems like a waste of time," she said. "Thrawn's probably just jumping at shadows. Anyway, how are you going to keep ysalamiri alive on a ship without transplanting some trees along with them?"

 "I'm sure Thrawn has some ideas as to the mechanics of it," Karrde assured her. "Dankin and Chin will know how to poke around for details."

 Her eyes seemed strangely hooded. "Yes," she muttered, her voice conceding defeat. "I'm sure they will."

 "And in the meantime," Karrde said, pretending not to notice, "we still have business to discuss. As I recall, you were going to list some improvements you would make in the organization."

 "Yes." Mara took another deep breath, closing her eyes... and when she opened them again she was back to her usual cool self. "Yes. Well"

 Slowly at first, but with ever-increasing confidence, she launched into a detailed and generally insightful compendium of his group's shortcomings. Karrde listened closely as he ate, wondering again at the hidden talents of this woman. Someday, he promised himself silently, he was going to find a way to dig the details of her past out from under the cloak of secrecy she'd so carefully shrouded it with. To find out where she'd come from, and who and what she was.

 And to learn exactly what it was Luke Skywalker had done to make her so desperately hate him.

 

 Chapter 4

 It took theChimaera nearly five days at its Point Four cruising speed to cover the three hundred fifty light-years between Myrkr and Wayland. But that was all right, because it took the engineers nearly that long to come up with a portable frame that would both support and nourish the ysalamiri.

 "I'm still not convinced this is really necessary," Pellaeon grumbled, eyeing with distaste the thick curved pipe and the furscaled, salamanderlike creature attached to it. The pipe and its attached frame were blasted heavy, and the creature itself didn't smell all that good. "If this Guardian you're expecting was put on Wayland by the Emperor in the first place, then I don't see why we should have any problems with him."

 "Call it a precaution, Captain," Thrawn said, settling into the shuttle's copilot seat and fastening his own straps. "It's conceivable we could have trouble convincing him of who we are. Or even that we still serve the Empire." He sent a casual glance across the displays and nodded to the pilot. "Go."

 There was a muffledclank , and with a slight jolt the shuttle dropped from theChimera 's docking bay and started its descent toward the planet surface. "We might have had an easier time convincing him with a squad of stormtroopers along," Pellaeon muttered, watching the repeater display beside his seat.

 "We might also have irritated him," Thrawn pointed out. A Dark Jedi's pride and sensibilities are not to be taken lightly, Captain. Besides" he looked over his shoulder "that's what Rukh is for. Any close associate of the Emperor ought to be familiar with the glorious role the Noghri have played over the years."

 Pellaeon glanced at the silent nightmare figure seated across the aisle. "You seem certain, sir, that the Guardian will be a Dark Jedi."

 "Who else would the Emperor have chosen to protect his personal storehouse?" Thrawn countered. "A legion of stormtroopers, perhaps, equipped with AT-ATs and the kind of advanced weaponry and technology you could detect from orbit with your eyes closed?"

 Pellaeon grimaced. That, at least, was something they wouldn't have to worry about. TheChimera 's scanners had picked up nothing beyond bow-and-arrow stage anywhere on Wayland's surface. It wasn't all that much comfort. "I'm just wondering whether the Emperor might have pulled him off Wayland to help against the Rebellion."

 Thrawn shrugged. "We'll know soon enough."

 The gentle roar of atmospheric friction against the shuttle's hull was growing louder now, and on Pellaeon's repeater display details of the planet's surface were becoming visible. Much of the area directly beneath them appeared to be forest, spotted here and there with large, grassy plains. Ahead, occasionally visible through the haze of clouds, a single mountain rose above the landscape. "Is thatMountTantiss ?" he asked the pilot.

 "Yes, sir," the other confirmed. "The city ought to be visible soon."

 "Right." Reaching surreptitiously to his right thigh, Pellaeon adjusted his blaster in its holster. Thrawn could be as confident as he liked, both in the ysalamiri and in his own logic. For his part, Pellaeon still wished they had more firepower.

 The city nestled against the southwestern base ofMountTantiss was larger than it had looked from orbit, with many of its squat buildings extending deep under the cover of the surrounding trees. Thrawn had the pilot circle the area twice, and then put down in the center of what appeared to be the main city square, facing a large and impressively regal-looking building.

 "Interesting," Thrawn commented, looking out the viewports as he settled his ysalamir backpack onto his shoulders. "There are at least three styles of architecture out therehuman plus two different alien species. It's not often you see such diversity in the same planetary region, let alone side by side in the same city. In fact, that palace thing in front of us has itself incorporated elements from all three styles."

 "Yes," Pellaeon agreed absently, peering out the viewports himself. At the moment, the buildings were of far less interest to him than the people the life-form sensors said were hiding behind and inside them. "Any idea whether those alien species are hostile toward strangers?"

 "Probably," Thrawn said, stepping to the shuttle's exit ramp, where Rukh was already waiting. "Most alien species are. Shall we go?"

 The ramp lowered with a hiss of released gases. Gritting his teeth, Pellaeon joined the other two. With Rukh in the lead, they headed down.

 No one shot at them as they reached the ground and took a few steps away from the shuttle. Nor did anyone scream, call out, or make any appearance at all. "Shy, aren't they?" Pellaeon murmured, keeping his hand on his blaster as he looked around.

 "Understandably," Thrawn said, pulling a megaphone disk from his belt. "Let's see if we can persuade them to be hospitable."

 Cupping the disk in his hand, he raised it to his lips. "I seek the Guardian of the mountain," his voice boomed across the square, the last syllable echoing from the surrounding buildings. "Who will take me to him?"

 The last echo died away into silence. Thrawn lowered the disk and waited; but the seconds ticked by without any response. "Maybe they don't understand Basic," Pellaeon suggested doubtfully.

 "No, they understand," Thrawn said coldly. "The humans do, at any rate. Perhaps they need more motivation." He raised the megaphone again. "I seek the Guardian of the mountain," he repeated. "If no one will take me to him, this entire city will suffer."

 The words were barely out of his mouth when, without warning, an arrow flashed toward them from the right. It struck Thrawn in the side, barely missing the ysalamir tube wrapped around his shoulders and back, and bounced harmlessly off the body armor hidden beneath the white uniform. "Hold," Thrawn ordered as Rukh leaped to his side, blaster at the ready. "You have the location?"

 "Yes," the Noghri grated, his blaster pointed at a squat two-story structure a quarter of the way around the square from the palace.

 "Good." Thrawn raised the megaphone again. "One of your people just shot at us. Observe the consequences." Lowering the disk again, he nodded to Rukh. "Now."

 And with a tight grin of his needle teeth, Rukh proceededquickly, carefully, and scientificallyto demolish the building.

 He took out the windows and doors first, putting perhaps a dozen shots through them to discourage any further attack. Then he switched to the lower-floor walls. By the twentieth shot, the building was visibly trembling on its foundations. A handful of shots into the upper-floor walls, a few more into the lower

 And with a thunderous crash, the building collapsed in on itself.

 Thrawn waited until the sound of crunching masonry had died away before raising the megaphone again. "Those are the consequences of defying me," he called. "I ask once more: who will take me to the Guardian of the mountain?"

 "I will," a voice said from their left.

 Pellaeon spun around. The man standing in front of the palace building was tall and thin, with unkempt gray hair and a beard that reached almost to the middle of his chest. He was dressed in shin-laced sandals and an old brown robe, with a glittering medallion of some sort half hidden behind the beard. His face was dark and lined and regal to the point of arrogance as he studied them, his eyes holding a mixture of curiosity and disdain. "You are strangers," he said, the same mixture in his voice. "Strangers" he glanced up at the shuttle towering over them "from offworld."

 "Yes, we are," Thrawn acknowledged. "And you?"

 The old man's eyes flicked to the smoking rubble Rukh had just created. "You destroyed one of my buildings," he said. "There was no need for that."

 "We were attacked," Thrawn told him coolly. "Were you its landlord?"

 The stranger's eyes might have flashed; at the distance, Pellaeon couldn't say for certain. "I rule," he said, his voice quiet hut with menace beneath it. "All that is here is mine."

 For a handful of heartbeats he and Thrawn locked eyes. Thrawn broke the silence first. "I am Grand Admiral Thrawn, Warlord of the Empire, servant of the Emperor. I seek the Guardian of the mountain."

 The old man bowed his head slightly. "I will take you to him."

 Turning, he started back toward the palace. "Stay close together," Thrawn murmured to the others as he moved to follow. "Be alert for a trap."

 No more arrows came as they crossed the square and walked under the carved keystone archway framing the palace's double doors. "I would have thought the Guardian would be living in the mountain," Thrawn said as their guide pulled open the doors. They came easily; the old man, Pellaeon decided, must be stronger than he looked.

 "He did, once," the other said over his shoulder. "When I began my rule, the people of Wayland built this for him." He crossed to the center of the ornate foyer room, halfway to another set of double doors, and stopped. "Leave us," he called.

 For a split second Pellaeon thought the old man was talking to him. He was just opening his mouth to refuse when two flanking sections of wall swung open and a pair of scrawny men stepped out of hidden guard niches. Glowering silently at the Imperials, they shouldered their crossbows and left the building. The old man waited until they were gone, then continued on to the second set of double doors. "Come," he said, gesturing to the doors, an odd glitter in his eyes. "The Emperor's Guardian awaits you."

 Silently, the doors swung open, revealing the light of what looked to be several hundred candles filling a huge room. Pellaeon glanced once at the old man standing beside the doors, a sudden premonition of dread sending a shiver up his back. Taking a deep breath, he followed Thrawn and Rukh inside.

 Into a crypt.

 There was no doubt as to what it was. Aside from the flickering candles, there was nothing else in the room but a large rectangular block of dark stone in the center.

 "I see," Thrawn said quietly. "So he is dead."

 "He is dead," the old man confirmed from behind them. "Do you see all the candles, Grand Admiral Thrawn?"

 "I see them," Thrawn nodded. "The people must have honored him greatly."

 "Honored him?" The old man snorted gently. "Hardly. Those candles mark the graves of offworlders who have come here since his death."

 Pellaeon twisted to face him, instinctively drawing his blaster as he did so. Thrawn waited another few heartbeats before slowly turning around himself. "How did they die?" he asked.

 The old man smiled faintly. "I killed them, of course. Just as I killed the Guardian." He raised his empty hands in front of him, palms upward. "Just as I now kill you."

 Without warning, blue lightning bolts flashed from his fingertips

 And vanished without a trace a meter away from each of them.

 It all happened so fast that Pellaeon had no chance to even flinch, let alone fire. Now, belatedly, he raised his blaster, the scalding hot air from the bolts washing over his hand

 "Hold," Thrawn said calmly into the silence. "However, as you can see, Guardian, we are not ordinary offworlders."

 "The Guardian is dead!" the old man snapped, the last word almost swallowed up by the crackle of more lightning. Again, the bolts vanished into nothingness before even coming close.

 "Yes, the old Guardian is dead," Thrawn agreed, shouting to be heard over the crackling thunder. "You are the Guardian now. It is you who protects the Emperor's mountain."

 "I serve no Emperor!" the old man retorted, unleashing a third useless salvo. "My power is for myself alone."

 As suddenly as it had started, the attack ceased. The old man stared at Thrawn, his hands still raised, a puzzled and oddly petulant expression on his face. "You are not Jedi. How do you do this?"

 "Join us and learn," Thrawn suggested.

 The other drew himself up to his full height. "I am a Jedi Master," he ground out. "I join no one."

 "I see," Thrawn nodded. "In that case, permitus to joinyou ." His glowing red eyes bored into the old man's face. "And permit us to show you how you can have more power than you've ever imagined. All the power even a Jedi Master could desire."

 For a long moment the old man continued to stare at Thrawn, a dozen strange expressions flicking in quick succession across his face. "Very well," he said at last. "Come. We will talk."

 "Thank you," Thrawn said, inclining his head slightly. "May I ask who we have the honor of addressing?"

 "Of course." The old man's face was abruptly regal again, and when he spoke his voice rang out in the silence of the crypt. "I am the Jedi Master Joruus C'baoth."

 Pellaeon inhaled sharply, a cold shiver running up his back. "Jorus C'baoth?" he breathed. "But"

 He broke off. C'baoth looked at him, much as Pellaeon himself might look at a junior officer who has spoken out of turn. "Come," he repeated, turning back to Thrawn. "We will talk."

 He led the way out of the crypt and back into the sunshine. Several small knots of people had gathered in the square in their absence, huddling well back from both the crypt and the shuttle as they whispered nervously together.

 With one exception. Standing directly in their path a few meters away was one of the two guards C'baoth had ordered out of the crypt. On his face was an expression of barely controlled fury; in his hands, cocked and ready, was his crossbow. "You destroyed his home," C'baoth said, almost conversationally. "Doubtless he would like to exact vengeance."

 The words were barely out of his mouth when the guard suddenly snapped the crossbow up and fired. Instinctively, Pellaeon ducked, raising his blaster

 And three meters from the Imperials the bolt came to an abrupt halt in midair.

 Pellaeon stared at the hovering piece of wood and metal, his brain only slowly catching up with what had just happened. "They are our guests," C'baoth told the guard in a voice clearly intended to reach everyone in the square. "They will be treated accordingly."

 With a crackle of splintering wood, the crossbow bolt shattered, the pieces dropping to the ground. Slowly, reluctantly, the guard lowered his crossbow, his eyes still burning with a now impotent rage. Thrawn let him stand there another second like that, then gestured to Rukh. The Noghri raised his blaster and fired

 And in a blur of motion almost too fast to see, a flat stone detached itself from the ground and hurled itself directly into the path of the shot, shattering spectacularly as the blast hit it.

 Thrawn spun to face C'baoth, his face a mirror of surprise and anger. "C'baoth!"

 "These aremy people, Grand Admiral Thrawn," the other cut him off, his voice forged from quiet steel. "Not yours; mine. If there is punishment to be dealt out,I will do it."

 For a long moment the two men again locked eyes. Then, with an obvious effort, Thrawn regained his composure. "Of course, Master C'baoth," he said. "Forgive me."

 C'baoth nodded. "Better. Much better." He looked past Thrawn, dismissed the guard with a nod. "Come," he said, looking back at the Grand Admiral. "We will talk."

 

 "You will now tell me," C'baoth said, gesturing them to low cushions, "how it was you defeated my attack."

 "Let me first explain our offer," Thrawn said, throwing a casual glance around the room before easing carefully down on one of the cushions. Probably, Pellaeon thought, the Grand Admiral was examining the bits of artwork scattered around. "I believe you'll find it"

 "You will now tell me how it was you defeated my attack," C'baoth repeated.

 A slight grimace, quickly suppressed, touched Thrawn's lips. "It's quite simple, actually." He looked up at the ysalamir wrapped around his shoulders, reaching a finger over to gently stroke its long neck. "These creatures you see on our backs are called ysalamiri. They're sessile tree-dwelling creatures from a distant, third-rate planet, and they have an interesting and possibly unique abilitythey push back the Force."

 C'baoth frowned. "What do you mean, push it back?"

 "They push its presence out away from themselves," Thrawn explained. "Much the same way a bubble is created by air pushing outward against water. A single ysalamir can occasionally create a bubble as large as ten meters across; a whole group of them reinforcing one another can create much larger ones."

 "I've never heard of such a thing," C'baoth said, staring at Thrawn's ysalamir with an almost childlike intensity. "How could such a creature have come about?"

 "I really don't know," Thrawn conceded. "I assume the talent has some survival value, but what that would be I can't imagine." He cocked an eyebrow. "Not that it matters. For the moment, the ability itself is sufficient for my purpose."

 C'baoth's face darkened. "That purpose being to defeat my power?"

 Thrawn shrugged. "We were expecting to find the Emperor's Guardian here. I needed to make certain he would allow us to identify ourselves and explain our mission." He reached up again to stroke the ysalamir's neck. "Though as it happens, protecting us from the Guardian was really only an extra bonus. I have something far more interesting in mind for our little pets."

 "That being...?"

 Thrawn smiled. "All in good time, Master C'baoth.And only after we've had a chance to examine the Emperor's storehouse inMountTantiss ."

 C'baoth's lip twisted. "So the mountain is all you really want."

 "I need the mountain, certainly," Thrawn acknowledged. "Or rather, what I hope to find within it."

 "And that is...?"

 Thrawn studied him for a moment. "There were rumors, just before the Battle of Endor, that the Emperor's researchers had finally developed a genuinely practical cloaking shield. I want it. Also," he added, almost as an afterthought, "another smallalmost trivialbit of technology."

 "And you think to find one of these cloaking shields in the mountain?"

 "I expect to find either a working model or at least a complete set of schematics," Thrawn said. "One of the Emperor's purposes in setting up this storehouse was to make sure that interesting and potentially useful technology didn't get lost."

 "That, and collecting endless mementos of his glorious conquests." C'baoth snorted. "There are rooms and rooms of that sort of cackling self-congratulation."

 Pellaeon sat up a bit straighter. "You've been inside the mountain?" he asked. Somehow, he'd expected the storehouse to be sealed with all sorts of locks and barriers.

 C'baoth sent him a scornfully patient look. "Of course I've been inside. I killed the Guardian, remember?" He looked back at Thrawn. "So. You want the Emperor's little toys; and now you know you can just walk into the mountain, with or without my help. Why are you still sitting here?"

 "Because the mountain is only part of what I need," Thrawn told him. "I also require the partnership of a Jedi Master like yourself."

 C'baoth settled back into his cushion, a cynical smile showing through his beard. "Ah, we finally get down to it. This, I take it, is where you offer me all the power even a Jedi Master could desire?"

 Thrawn smiled back. "It is indeed. Tell me, Master C'baoth: are you familiar with the Imperial Fleet's disastrous defeat at the Battle of Endor five years ago?"

 "I've heard rumors. One of the offworlders who came here spoke about it." C'baoth's gaze drifted to the window, to the palace/crypt visible across the square. "Though only briefly."

 Pellaeon swallowed. Thrawn himself didn't seem to notice the implication. "Then you must have wondered how a few dozen Rebel ships could possibly rout an Imperial force that outgunned it by at least ten to one."

 "I didn't spend much time with such wonderings," C'baoth said dryly. "I assumed that the Rebels were simply better warriors."

 "In a sense, that's true," Thrawn agreed. "The Rebels did indeed fight better, but not because of any special abilities or training. They fought better than the Fleet because the Emperor was dead."

 He turned to look at Pellaeon. "You were there, Captainyou must have noticed it. The sudden loss of coordination between crew members and ships; the loss of efficiency and discipline. The loss, in short, of that elusive quality we call fighting spirit."

 "There was some confusion, yes," Pellaeon said stiffly. He was starting to see where Thrawn was going with this, and he didn't like it a bit. "But nothing that can't be explained by the normal stresses of battle."

 One blue-black eyebrow went up, just slightly. "Really? The loss of theExecutor the sudden, last-minute TIE fighter incompetence that brought about the destruction of the Death Star itselfthe loss of six other Star Destroyers in engagements that none of them should have had trouble with?All of that nothing but normal battle stress?"

 "The Emperor was not directing the battle," Pellaeon snapped with a fire that startled him. "Not in any way. I was there, AdmiralIknow."

 "Yes, Captain, you were there," Thrawn said, his voice abruptly hard. "And it's time you gave up your blindfold and faced the truth, no matter how bitter you find it. You had no real fighting spirit of your own anymorenone of you in the Imperial Fleet did. It was the Emperor's will that drove you; the Emperor's mind that provided you with strength and resolve and efficiency. You were as dependent on that presence as if you were all borg-implanted into a combat computer."

 "That's not true," Pellaeon shot back, stomach twisting painfully within him. "It can't be. We fought on after his death."

 "Yes," Thrawn said, his voice quiet and contemptuous. "You fought on. Like cadets."

 C'baoth snorted. "So isthis what you want me for, Grand Admiral Thrawn?" he asked scornfully. "To turn your ships into puppets for you?"

 "Not at all, Master C'baoth," Thrawn told him, his voice perfectly calm again. "My analogy with combat borg implants was a carefully considered one. The Emperor's fatal error was in seeking to control the entire Imperial Fleet personally, as completely and constantly as possible. That, over the long run, is what did the damage. My wish is merely to have you enhance the coordination between ships and task forcesand then only at critical times and in carefully selected combat situations."

 C'baoth threw a look at Pellaeon. "To what end?" he rumbled.

 "To the end we've already discussed," Thrawn said. "Power."

 "What sort of power?"

 For the first time since landing, Thrawn seemed taken aback. "The conquering of worlds, of course. The final defeat of the Rebellion. The reestablishment of the glory that was once the Empire's New Order."

 C'baoth shook his head. "You don't understand power, Grand Admiral Thrawn. Conquering worlds you'll never even visit again isn't power. Neither is destroying ships and people and rebellions you haven't looked at face-to-face." He waved his hands in a sweeping gesture around him, his eyes glittering with an eerie fire. "This, Grand Admiral Thrawn, is power. This citythis planetthese people. Every human, Psadan, and Myneyrsh who live here are mine.Mine ." His gaze drifted to the window again. "I teach them. I command them. I punish them. Their lives, and their deaths, are inmy hand."

 "Which is precisely what I offer you," Thrawn said. "Millions of livesbillions, if you wish. All those lives to do with as you please."

 "It isn't the same," C'baoth said, a note of paternal patience in his voice. "I have no desire to hold distant power over faceless lives."

 "You could have just a single city to rule, then," Thrawn persisted. "As large or as small as you wish."

 "I rule a city now."

 Thrawn's eyes narrowed. "I need your assistance, Master C'baoth. Name your price."

 C'baoth smiled. "My price? The price for my service?" Abruptly, the smile vanished. "I'm a Jedi Master, Grand Admiral Thrawn," he said, his voice simmering with menace. "Not a mercenary for hire like your Noghri."

 He threw a contemptuous look at Rukh, sitting silently off to one side. "Oh, yes, NoghriI know what you and your people are. The Emperor's private Death Commandos; killing and dying at the whim of ambitious men like Darth Vader and the Grand Admiral here."

 "Lord Vader served the Emperor and the Empire," Rukh grated, his dark eyes staring unblinkingly at C'baoth. "As do we."

 "Perhaps." C'baoth turned back to Thrawn. "I have all I want or need, Grand Admiral Thrawn. You will leave Wayland now."

 Thrawn didn't move. "I need your assistance, Master C'baoth," he repeated quietly. "And I will have it."

 "Or you'll do what?" C'baoth sneered. "Have your Noghri try to kill me? It would almost be amusing to watch." He looked at Pellaeon. "Or perhaps you'll have your brave Star Destroyer captain try to level my city from orbit. Except that you can't risk damaging the mountain, can you?"

 "My gunners could destroy this city without even singeing the grass onMountTantiss ," Pellaeon retorted. "If you need a demonstration"

 "Peace, Captain," Thrawn cut him off calmly. "So it's the personal, face-to-face sort of power you prefer, Master C'baoth? Yes, I can certainly understand that. Not that there can be much challenge left in itnot anymore. Of course," he added reflectively, glancing out the window, "that may be the whole idea. I expect that even Jedi Masters eventually get too old to be interested in anything except to sit out in the sun."

 C'baoth's forehead darkened. "Have a care, Grand Admiral Thrawn," he warned. "Or perhaps I'll seek challenge in your destruction."

 "That would hardly be a challenge for a man of your skill and power," Thrawn countered with a shrug. "But then, you probably already have other Jedi here under your command."

 C'baoth frowned, obviously thrown by the sudden change in subject. "Other Jedi?" he echoed.

 "Of course. Surely it's only fitting that a Jedi Master have lesser Jedi serving beneath him. Jedi whom he may teach and command and punish at will."

 Something like a shadow crossed C'baoth's face. "There are no Jedi left," he murmured. "The Emperor and Vader hunted them down and destroyed them."

 "Not all of them," Thrawn told him softly. "Two new Jedi have arisen in the past five years: Luke Skywalker and his sister, Leia Organa Solo."

 "And what is that to me?"

 "I can deliver them to you."

 For a long minute C'baoth stared at him, disbelief and desire struggling for supremacy on his face. The desire won. "Both of them?"

 "Both of them," Thrawn nodded. "Consider what a man of your skill could do with brand-new Jedi. Mold them, change them, re-create them in any image you chose." He cocked an eyebrow. "And with them would come a very special bonus... because Leia Organa Solo is pregnant. With twins."

 C'baoth inhaled sharply. "Jeditwins?" he hissed.

 "They have the potential, or so my sources tell me." Thrawn smiled. "Of course, what they ultimately became would be entirely up to you."

 C'baoth's eyes darted to Pellaeon; back to Thrawn. Slowly, deliberately, he stood up. "Very well, Grand Admiral Thrawn," he said. "In return for the Jedi, I will assist your forces. Take me to your ship."

 "In time, Master C'baoth," Thrawn said, getting to his feet himself. "First we must go into the Emperor's mountain. This bargain is dependent on whether I find what I'm looking for there."

 "Of course." C'baoth's eyes flashed. "Let us both hope," he said warningly, "that you do."

 It took seven hours of searching, through a mountain fortress much larger than Pellaeon had expected. But in the end, they did indeed find the treasures Thrawn had hoped for. The cloaking shield... and that other small, almost trivial, bit of technology.

 

 The door to the Grand Admiral's command room slid open; settling himself, Pellaeon stepped inside. "A word with you, Admiral?"

 "Certainly, Captain," Thrawn said from his seat in the center of the double display circle. "Come in. Has there been any update from theImperialPalace ?"

 "No, sir, not since yesterday's," Pellaeon said as he walked to the edge of the outer circle, silently rehearsing one last time how he was going to say this. "I can request one, if you'd like."

 "Probably unnecessary," Thrawn shook his head. "It looks like the details of the Bimmisaari trip have been more or less settled. All we have to do is alert one of the commando groupsTeam Eight, I thinkand we'll have our Jedi."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon braced himself. "Admiral... I have to tell you that I'm not convinced dealing with C'baoth is a good idea. To be perfectly honest, I don't think he's entirely sane."

 Thrawn cocked an eyebrow. "Of course he's not sane. But then, he's not Jorus C'baoth, either."

 Pellaeon felt his mouth fall open. "What?"

 "Jorus C'baoth is dead," Thrawn said. "He was one of the six Jedi Masters aboard theOldRepublic 's Outbound Flight project. I don't know if you were highly enough placed back then to have known about it."

 "I heard rumors," Pellaeon frowned, thinking back. "Some sort of grand effort to extend theOldRepublic 's authority outside the galaxy, as I recall, launched just before the Clone Wars broke out. I never heard anything more about it."

 "That's because there wasn't anything more to be heard," Thrawn said evenly. "It was intercepted by a task force outsideOldRepublic space and destroyed."

 Pellaeon stared at him, a shiver running up his back. "How do you know?"

 Thrawn raised his eyebrows. "Because I was the force's commander. Even at that early date the Emperor recognized that the Jedi had to be exterminated. Six Jedi Masters aboard the same ship was too good an opportunity to pass up."

 Pellaeon licked his lips. "But then...?"

 "Who is it we've brought aboard theChimaera ?" Thrawn finished the question for him. "I should have thought that obvious. Joruus C'baothnote the telltale mispronunciation of the nameJorus is a clone."

 Pellaeon stared at him. "Aclone ?"

 "Certainly," Thrawn said. "Created from a tissue sample, probably sometime just before the real C'baoth's death."

 "Early in the war, in other words," Pellaeon said, swallowing hard. The early clonesor at least those the fleet had facedhad been highly unstable, both mentally and emotionally. Sometimes spectacularly so... "And you deliberately brought this thing aboard my ship?" he demanded.

 "Would you rather we have brought back a full-fledged Dark Jedi?" Thrawn asked coldly. "A second Darth Vader, perhaps, with the sort of ambitions and power that might easily lead him to take over your ship? Count your blessings, Captain."

 "At least a Dark Jedi would have been predictable," Pellaeon countered.

 "C'baoth is predictable enough," Thrawn assured him. "And for those times when he isn't" He waved a hand at the half dozen frameworks encircling his command center. "That's what the ysalamiri are for."

 Pellaeon grimaced. "I still don't like it, Admiral. We can hardly protect the ship from him while at the same time having him coordinate the fleet's attacks."

 "There's a degree of risk involved," Thrawn agreed. "But risk has always been an inescapable part of warfare. In this case, the potential benefits far outweigh the potential dangers."

 Reluctantly, Pellaeon nodded. He didn't like itwas fairly certain he would never like itbut it was clear that Thrawn had made up his mind. "Yes, sir," he muttered. "You mentioned a message to Team Eight. Will you be wanting me to transmit that?"

 "No, I'll handle it myself." Thrawn smiled sardonically. "Their glorious leader, and all thatyou know how Noghri are. If there's nothing more...?"

 It was, clearly, a dismissal. "No, sir," Pellaeon said. "I'll be on the bridge if you require me." He turned to go.

 "It will bring us victory, Captain," the Grand Admiral called softly after him. "Quiet your fears, and concentrate on that."

 If it doesn't kill us all."Yes, sir," Pellaeon said aloud, and left the room.

 

 Chapter 5

 Han finished his report, sat back, and waited for the criticism to start.

 It was a very short wait. "So once again your smuggler friends refuse to commit themselves," Admiral Ackbar said, sounding more than a little disgusted. His high-domed head bobbed twice in some indecipherable Calamarian gesture, his huge eyes blinking in time with the head movements. "You'll recall that I disagreed with this idea all along," he added, waving a webbed hand toward Han's report case.

 Han glanced across the table at Leia. "It's not a matter of commitment, Admiral," he told the other. "It's a matter that most of them just don't see any real gain in switching from their current activities to straight shipping."

 "Or else it's a lack of trust," a melodic alien voice put in. "Could that be it?"

 Han grimaced before he could stop himself. "It's possible," he said, forcing himself to look at Borsk Fey'lya.

 "Possible?" Fey'lya's violet eyes widened, the fine cream-colored fur covering his body rippling slightly with the motion. It was a Bothan gesture of polite surprise, one which Fey'lya seemed to use a lot. "You saidpossible , Captain Solo?"

 Han sighed quietly and gave up. Fey'lya would only maneuver him into saying it some other way if he didn't. "Some of the groups I've talked to don't trust us," he conceded. "They think the offer might be some sort of trap to bring them out into the open."

 "Because of me, of course," Ackbar growled, his normal salmon color turning a little darker. "Haven't you tired of retaking this same territory, Councilor Fey'lya?"

 Fey'lya's eyes widened again, and for a moment he gazed silently at Ackbar as the tension around the table quickly rose to the level of thick paste. They had never liked each other, Han knew, not from the day Fey'lya had first brought his sizable faction of the Bothan race into theAlliance after the Battle of Yavin. Right from the start Fey'lya had been jockeying for position and power, cutting deals wherever and whenever he could and making it abundantly clear that he expected to be given a high position in the fledgling political system Mon Mothma was putting together. Ackbar had considered such ambitions to be a dangerous waste of time and effort, particularly given the bleak situation theAlliance was facing at the time, and with typical bluntness had made no effort to conceal that opinion.

 Given Ackbar's reputation and subsequent successes, Han had little doubt that Fey'lya would ultimately have been shunted off to some relatively unimportant government post in theNewRepublic ... if it hadn't happened that the spies who discovered the existence and location of the Emperor's new Death Star had been a group of Fey'lya's Bothans.

 Preoccupied at the time with more urgent matters, Han had never learned the details of how Fey'lya had managed to parlay that serendipity into his current position on the Council. And to be perfectly honest, he wasn't sure he wanted to.

 "I merely seek to clarify the situation in my own mind, Admiral," Fey'lya said at last into the heavy silence. "It's hardly worthwhile for us to continue sending a valuable man like Captain Solo out on these contact missions if each is predoomed to failure."

 "They'renot predoomed to failure," Han cut in. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Leia give him a warning look. He ignored it. "The kind of smugglers we're looking for are conservative businesspeoplethey don't just jump into something new without thinking it through first. They'll come around."

 Fey'lya shrugged, his fur again rippling. "And meanwhile, we expend a great deal of time and effort with nothing to show for it."

 "Look, you can't build up any"

 A gentle, almost diffident tap of a hammer from the head of the table cut off the argument. "What the smugglers are waiting for," Mon Mothma said quietly, her stern gaze touching each of the others at the table in turn, "is the same thing the rest of the galaxy is waiting for: the formal reestablishment of the principals and law of theOldRepublic .That is our first and primary task, Councilors. To become theNewRepublic in fact as well as in name."

 Han caught Leia's eye, and this time he was the one who sent out the warning look. She grimaced, but nodded slightly and kept quiet.

 Mon Mothma let the silence linger a moment longer, again sending her gaze around the table. Han found himself studying her, noting the deepening lines in her face, the streaks of gray in her dark hair, the thinness rather than slenderness of her neck. She'd aged a lot since he'd first met her, back when theAlliance was trying to find a way out from under the shadow of the Empire's second Death Star. Ever since then, Mon Mothma had been right in the middle of this horrendous task of setting up a viable government, and the strain had clearly told on her.

 But despite what the years were doing to her face, her eyes still held the same quiet fire they'd possessed thenthe same fire, or so the stories went, that had been there since her historic break with the Emperor's New Order and her founding of the Rebel Alliance. She was tough, and smart, and fully in control. And everyone present knew it.

 Her eyes finished their sweep and came to rest on Han. "Captain Solo, we thank you for your report; and, too, for your efforts. And with the Captain's report, this meeting is adjourned."

 She tapped the hammer again and stood up. Han closed his report case and worked his way through the general confusion around to the other side of the table. "So," he said quietly, coming up behind Leia as she collected her own things. "Are we out of here?"

 "The sooner the better," she muttered back. "I just have to give these things to Winter."

 Han glanced around and lowered his voice a notch. "I take it things were going a little rough before they called me in?"

 "No more than usual," she told him. "Fey'lya and Ackbar had one of their polite little dogfights, this one over the fiasco at Obroa-skaithat lost Elomin forcewith some more of Fey'lya's veiled suggestions that the job of Commander in Chief is too much for Ackbar to handle. And then, of course, Mon Mothma"

 "A word with you, Leia?" Mon Mothma's voice came from over Han's shoulder.

 Han turned to face her, sensing Leia tense a little beside him as she did likewise. "Yes?"

 "I forgot to ask you earlier if you'd talked to Luke about going with you to Bimmisaari," Mon Mothma said. "Did he agree?"

 "Yes," Leia nodded, throwing an apologetic look at Han. "I'm sorry, Han; I didn't get a chance to tell you. The Bimms sent a message yesterday asking that Luke be there with me for the talks."

 "They did, huh?" A year ago, Han reflected, he would probably have been furious at having a painstakingly crafted schedule flipped at the last minute like this. Leia's diplomatic patience must be starting to rub off on him.

 Either that, or he was just getting soft. "They give any reasons?"

 "The Bimms are rather hero-oriented," Mon Mothma said before Leia could answer, her eyes searching Han's face. Probably trying to figure out just how mad he was about the change in plans. "And Luke's part in the Battle of Endoris rather well known."

 "Yeah, I'd heard that," Han said, trying not to be too sarcastic. He had no particular quarrel with Luke's position in theNewRepublic 's pantheon of heroesthe kid had certainly earned it. But if having Jedi around to brag about was so important to Mon Mothma, then she ought to be letting Leia get on with her own studies instead of foisting all this extra diplomatic work on her. As it was, he would bet on an ambitious snail to make full Jedi before she did.

 Leia found his hand, squeezed it. He squeezed back, to show that he wasn't mad. Though she probably already knew that. "We'd better get going," she told Mon Mothma, using her grip on Han's hand to start steering him away from the table. "We still have to collect our droids before we leave."

 "Have a good trip," Mon Mothma said gravely. "And good luck."

 "The droids are already on theFalcon ," Han told Leia as they wove their way around the various conversations that had sprung up between the Councilors and staff members. "Chewie got them aboard while I came here."

 "I know," Leia murmured.

 "Right," Han said, and left it at that.

 She squeezed his hand again. "It'll be all right, Han. You, me, and Luke together againit'll be just like old times."

 "Sure," Han said. Sitting around with a group of half-furred, half-size aliens, listening to Threepio's precise voice all day as he translated back and forth, trying to penetrate yet another alien psychology to figure out what exactly it would take to get them to join the New Republic "Sure," he repeated with a sigh. "Just exactly like old times."

 

 Chapter 6

 The waving alien trees shied back like some sort of huge tentacles from the landing area, and with the barest of bumps Han set theMillennium Falcon down on the uneven ground. "Well, here we are," he announced to no one in particular. "Bimmisaari. Fur and moving plants a specialty."

 "None of that," Leia warned him, unstrapping from the seat behind him and running through the Jedi relaxation techniques Luke had taught her. Political dealings with people she knew were relatively easy for her. Diplomatic missions with unfamiliar alien races were something else entirely.

 "You'll do fine," Luke said from beside her, reaching over to squeeze her arm.

 Han half turned. "I wish you two wouldn't do that," he complained. "It's like listening to half a conversation."

 "Sorry," Luke apologized, climbing out of his seat and stooping to peer out theFalcon 's nose window. "Looks like our reception committee coming. I'll go get Threepio ready."

 "We'll be there in a minute," Leia called after him. "You ready, Han?"

 "Yeah," Han told her, adjusting his blaster in its holster. "Last chance to change your mind, Chewie."

 Leia strained her ears as Chewbacca growled out a curt reply. Even after all these years she still couldn't understand him nearly as well as Han couldsome subtle level of harmonics in the Wookiee's voice, apparently, that she had trouble picking up.

 But if some of the words were less than distinct, the overall meaning came through crystal clear. "Oh, come on," Han urged. "You've been fawned over beforeremember that big awards thing back at the Yavin base? I didn't hear you complainingthen ."

 "It's all right, Han," Leia put in over Chewbacca's response. "If he wants to stay aboard with Artoo and work on the stabilizers, that's fine. The Bimms won't be offended."

 Han looked out the nose window at the approaching delegation. "I wasn't worried about offending them," he muttered. "I just thought it'd be nice to have a little extra backup along. Just in case."

 Leia smiled and patted his arm. "The Bimms are very friendly people," she assured him. "There won't be any trouble."

 "I've heardthat before," Han said dryly, pulling a comlink from a small storage compartment beside his seat. He started to clip it to his belt; changed direction in midmotion and fastened it to his collar instead.

 "Looks good there," Leia said. "Are you going to put your old general's insignia on your belt now?"

 He made a face at her. "Very funny. With the comlink here, all I have to do is casually switch it on and I'll be able to talk to Chewie without being obvious about it."

 "Ah," Leia nodded. Itwas a good idea, at that. "Sounds like you've been spending too much time with Lieutenant Page and his commandos."

 "I've been spending too much time sitting in on Council meetings," he countered, sliding out of his seat and standing up. "After four years of watching political infighting, you learn the occasional value of subtlety. Come on, Chewiewe'll need you to lock up behind us."

 Luke and Threepio were waiting when they got to the hatchway. "Ready?" Luke asked.

 "Ready," Leia said, taking a deep breath. With a hiss of released airseal the hatchway opened, and together they walked down the ramp to where the yellow-clad, half-furred creatures waited.

 The arrival ceremony was short and, for the most part, unintelligible, though Threepio did his best to keep up a running translation of the five-part harmony the whole thing seemed to have been written in. The song/welcome ended and two of the Bimms stepped forward, one of them continuing the melody while the other held up a small electronic device. "He offers greetings to Distinguished Visitor Councilor Leia Organa Solo," Threepio said, "and hopes your discussions with the Law Elders will be fruitful. He also requests that Captain Solo return his weapon to the ship."

 The droid said it so matter-of-factly that it took a second for the words to penetrate. "What was that last?" Leia asked.

 "Captain Solo must leave his weapon aboard the ship," Threepio repeated. "Weapons of violence are not permitted within the city. There are no exceptions."

 "Terrific," Han murmured into her ear. "You didn't tell me this one was coming."

 "I didn'tknow this one was coming," Leia countered quietly, giving the two Bimms a reassuring smile. "Doesn't look like we've got any choice."

 "Diplomacy," Han growled, making a curse out of the word. Unfastening his gun belt, he wrapped it carefully around the holstered blaster and set the package up inside the hatchway. "Happy?"

 "Aren't I always?" Leia nodded to Threepio. "Tell them we're ready."

 The droid translated. Stepping aside, the two Bimms gestured back the way they'd come.

 They were perhaps twenty meters from theFalcon , with the sounds of Chewbacca sealing the hatchway coming from behind them, when something abruptly occurred to Leia. "Luke?" she murmured.

 "Yes, I know," he murmured back. "Maybe they figure it's just part of the proper Jedi's outfit."

 "Or else their weapons detector doesn't read lightsabers," Han put in quietly from Leia's other side. "Either way, what they don't know won't hurt them."

 "I hope so," Leia said, forcing down her reflexive diplomatic misgivings. After all, if the Bimms themselves hadn't objected to it... "Good skies, would you look at that crowd?"

 They were waiting where the path exited the treeshundreds of Bimms, standing perhaps twenty deep on both sides of the way, all clothed in the same tooled yellow. The official reception committee shifted to single file and started down the gauntlet without giving the crowd a second glance; bracing herself, Leia followed.

 It was a little strange, but not nearly as uncomfortable as she'd feared it would be. Each Bimm reached out a hand as she passed, touching her with a feathery lightness on shoulder or head or arm or back. It was all done in complete silence, and complete order, with the aura of perfect civilization about it.

 Still, she was glad that Chewbacca had decided not to come. He hatedrather violentlybeing pawed by strangers.

 They passed through the crowd, and the Bimm walking nearest Leia sang something. "He says the Tower of Law is just ahead," Threepio translated. "It's the location of their planetary council."

 Leia peered over the heads of the leading Bimms. There, obviously, was the Tower of Law. And next to it... "Threepio, ask what that thing is beside it," she instructed the droid. "That building that looks like a three-level dome with the sides and most of the roof cut away."

 The droid sang, and the Bimm replied. "It's the city's main marketplace," Threepio told her. "He says they prefer the open air whenever possible."

 "That roof probably stretches to cover more of the dome framework when the weather's bad," Han added from behind her. "I've seen that design in a few other places."

 "He says that perhaps you can be given a tour of the facility before you leave," Threepio added.

 "Sounds great," Han said. "Wonderful place to pick up souvenirs."

 "Quiet," Leia warned. "Or you can wait in theFalcon with Chewie."

 The Bimmisaari Tower of Law was fairly modest, as planetary council meeting places went, topping the three-level marketplace beside it by only a couple of floors. Inside, they were led to a large room on the ground floor where, framed by huge tapestries covering the walls, another group of Bimms waited. Three of them stood and sang as Leia entered.

 "They add their greetings to those given you at the landing area, Princess Leia," Threepio translated. "They apologize, however, for the fact that the talks will not be able to begin quite yet. It appears that their chief negotiator became ill just moments ago."

 "Oh," Leia said, taken slightly aback. "Please express our sympathies, and ask if there's anything we can do to help."

 "They thank you," Threepio said after another exchange of songs. "But they assure you that will not be necessary. There is no danger to him, merely inconvenience." The droid hesitated. "I really don't think you should inquire further, Your Highness," he added, a bit delicately. "The complaint appears to be of a rather personal nature."

 "I understand," Leia said gravely, suppressing a smile at the prim tone of the droid's voice. "Well, in that case, I suppose we might as well return to theFalcon until he feels ready to continue."

 The droid translated, and one of their escort stepped forward and sang something in reply. "He offers an alternative, Your Highness: that he would be eager to conduct you on a tour of the marketplace while you wait."

 Leia glanced at Han and Luke. "Any objections?"

 The Bimm sang something else. "He further suggests that Master Luke and Captain Solo might find something to interest them in the Tower's upper chambers," Threepio said. "Apparently, there are relics there dating from the middle era of the Old Republic."

 A quiet alarm went off in the back of Leia's mind. Were the Bimms trying to split them up? "Luke and Han might like the market, too," she said cautiously.

 There was another exchange of arias. "He says they would find it excessively dull," Threepio told her. "Frankly, if it's anything like marketplaces I've seen"

 "I like marketplaces," Han cut him off brusquely, his voice dark with suspicion. "I like 'em a lot."

 Leia looked at her brother. "What do you think?"

 Luke's eyes swept the Bimms; measuring them, she knew, with all of his Jedi insight. "I don't see what danger they could be," he said slowly. "I don't sense any real duplicity in them. Nothing beyond that of normal politics, anyway."

 Leia nodded, her tension easing a little. Normal politics yes, that was probably all it was. The Bimm probably just wanted the chance to privately bend her ear on behalf of his particular viewpoint before the talks got started in earnest. "In that case," she said, inclining her head to the Bimm, "we accept."

 

 "The marketplace has been in this same spot for over two hundred years," Threepio translated as Han and Leia followed their host up the gentle ramp between the second and third levels of the open dome structure. "Though not in this exact form, of course. The Tower of Law, in fact, was built here precisely because it was already a common crossroads."

 "Hasn't changed much, has it?" Han commented, pressing close to Leia to keep them from getting run down by a particularly determined batch of shoppers. He'd seen a lot of marketplaces on a lot of different planets, but seldom one so crowded.

 Crowded with more than just locals, too. Scattered throughout the sea of yellow-clad Bimmsdon't they ever wear any other color?he could see several other humans, a pair of Baradas, an Ishi Tib, a group of Yuzzumi, and something that looked vaguely like a Paonnid.

 "You can see why this place is worth getting into the New Republic," Leia murmured to him.

 "I guess so," Han conceded, stepping to one of the booths and looking at the metalware displayed there. The owner/operator sang something toward him, gesturing to a set of carving knives. "No, thanks," Han told him, moving back. The Bimm continued to jabber at him, his gestures becoming sharper "Threepio, will you have our host tell him that we're not interested?" he called to the droid.

 There was no response. "Threepio?" he repeated, looking around.

 Threepio was staring off into the crowd. "Hey, Goldenrod," he snapped. "I'm talking to you."

 Threepio spun back. "I'm terribly sorry, Captain Solo," he apologized. "But our host seems to have disappeared."

 "What do you mean, disappeared?" Han demanded, looking around. Their particular Bimm, he remembered, had worn a set of shiny pins on his shoulders.

 Pins that were nowhere to be seen. "How could he just disappear?"

 Beside him, Leia gripped his hand. "I've got a bad feeling about this," she said tightly. "Let's get back to the Tower."

 "Yeah," Han agreed. "Come on, Threepio. Don't get lost." Shifting his grip on Leia's hand, he turned

 And froze. A few meters away, islands in the churning sea of yellow, three aliens stood facing them. Short aliens, not much taller than the Bimms, with steel-gray skin, large dark eyes, and protruding jaws.

 And, held ready in their hands, stokhli sticks.

 "We've got trouble," he murmured to Leia, turning his head slowly to look around, hoping desperately that those three were all there were.

 They weren't. There were at least eight more, arrayed in a rough circle ten meters across. A circle with Han, Leia, and Threepio at its center.

 "Han!" Leia said urgently.

 "I see them," he muttered. "We're in trouble, sweetheart."

 He sensed her glance behind them. "Who are they?" she breathed.

 "I don't knownever seen anything like them before. But they're not kidding around. Those things are called stokhli sticksshoot a spraynet mist two hundred meters, with enough shockstun juice to take down a good-sized Gundark." Abruptly, Han noticed that he and Leia had moved, instinctively backing away from the nearest part of the aliens' circle. He glanced over his shoulder "They're herding us toward the down ramp," he told her. "Must be trying to take us without stirring up the crowd."

 "We're doomed," Threepio moaned.

 Leia gripped Han's hand. "What are we going to do?"

 "Let's see how closely they're paying attention." Trying to watch all the aliens at once, Han casually reached his free hand toward the comlink attached to his collar.

 The nearest alien lifted his stokhli stick warningly. Han froze, slowly lowered the hand again. "So much for that idea," he muttered. "I think it's time to pull in the welcome mat. Better give Luke a shout."

 "He can't help us."

 Han glanced down at her; at her glazed eyes and pinched face. "Why not?" he demanded, stomach tightening.

 She sighed, just audibly. "They've got him, too."

 

 Chapter 7

 It was more a feeling than anything approaching an actual word, but it echoed through Luke's mind as clearly as if he'd heard it shouted.

 Help!

 He spun around, the ancient tapestry he'd been studying forgotten as his Jedi senses flared into combat readiness. Around him, the large top-floor Tower room was as it had been a minute earlier: deserted except for a handful of Bimms strolling among the huge wall tapestries and relic cases. No danger here, at least nothing immediate.What is it? he sent back, starting for the next room and the staircase leading down.

 He caught a quick vision from Leia's mind, a picture of alien figures and a vivid impression of a contracting noose.Hang on, he told her.I'm coming. All but running now, he ducked through the doorway to the staircase room, grabbing the jamb to help with his turn

 And braked to an abrupt halt. Standing between him and the stairway was a loose semicircle of seven silent gray figures.

 Luke froze, his hand still uselessly gripping the doorjamb, half a galaxy away from the lightsaber on his belt. He had no idea what the sticks were his assailants were pointing at him, but he had no desire to find out the hard way. Not unless he absolutely had to. "What do you want?" he asked aloud.

 The alien in the center of the semicirclethe leader, Luke guessedgestured with his stick. Luke glanced over his shoulder into the room he'd just left. "You want me to go back in there?" he asked.

 The leader gestured again... and this time Luke saw it. The small, almost insignificant tactical error. "All right," he said, as soothingly as possible. "No problem." Keeping his eyes on the aliens and his hands away from his lightsaber, he began to back up.

 They herded him steadily back across the room toward another archway and a room he hadn't gotten to before Leia's emergency call had come. "If you'd just tell me what you want, I'm sure we could come to some sort of agreement," Luke suggested as he walked. Faint scuffling sounds told him that there were still some Bimms wandering around, presumably the reason the aliens hadn't already attacked. "I would hope we could at least talk about it. There's no particular reason why any of you has to be hurt."

 Reflexively, the leader's left thumb moved. Not much, but Luke was watching, and it was enough. A thumb trigger, then. "If you have some business with me, I'm willing to talk," he continued. "You don't need my friends in the marketplace for that."

 He was almost to the archway now. A couple more steps to go. If they'd just hold off shooting him that long...

 And then he was there, with the carved stone looming over him. "Now where?" he asked, forcing his muscles to relax. This was it.

 Again, the leader gestured with his stick... and midway through the motion, for a single instant, the weapon was pointed not at Luke but at two of his own companions.

 And reaching out through the Force, Luke triggered the thumb switch. There was a loud, sharp hiss as the stick bucked in its owner's hands and what looked like a fine spray shot out the end.

 Luke didn't wait to see what exactly the spray did. The maneuver had bought him maybe a half second of confusion, and he couldn't afford to waste any of it. Throwing himself back and to the side, he did a flip into the room behind him, angling to get to the slight protection afforded by the wall beside the doorway.

 He just barely made it. Even as he cleared the archway there was a stuttering salvo of sharp hisses, and as he flipped back to his feet he saw that the doorjamb had grown strange semisolid tendrils of some thin, translucent material. Another tendril shot through the doorway as he hastily backed farther away, sweeping in a spiral curve that seemed to turn from fine mist to liquid stream to solid cylinder even as it curved.

 His lightsaber was in his hand now, igniting with asnap-hiss of its own. They'd be through that doorway in seconds, he knew, all efforts at subtlety abandoned. And when they came

 He clenched his teeth, a memory of his brief skiff-battle encounter with Boba Fett flashing through his mind. Wrapped in the bounty hunter's smart-rope, he'd escaped only by snapping the cable with a deflected blaster shot. But here there would be no blasters to try that trick with.

 For that matter, he wasn't absolutely sure what his lightsaber could do directly against the sprays. It would be like trying to cut through a rope that was continually re-creating itself.

 Or rather, like trying to cut seven such ropes.

 He could hear their footsteps now, sprinting toward his room even as the spiraling tendril sweeping the doorway made sure he stayed too far back to ambush them as they came through it. A standard military technique, played out with the kind of precision that showed he wasn't dealing with amateurs.

 He raised the lightsaber to en garde position, risking a quick look around. The room was decorated like all the others he'd seen on this floor, with ancient wall tapestries and other relics no real cover anywhere. His eyes flicked across the walls, searching for the exit that by implication had to be here somewhere. But the action was so much useless reflex. Wherever the exit was, it was almost certainly too far away to do him any good.

 The hiss of the spray stopped; and he turned back just in time to see the aliens charge into the room. They spotted him, spun around to bring their weapons to bear

 And reaching up with the Force, Luke ripped one of the tapestries from the wall beside him and brought it down on top of them.

 It was a trick that only a Jedi could have pulled off, and it was a trick that, by all rights, ought to have worked. All seven of the aliens were in the room by the time he got the tapestry loose, and all seven were beneath it as it began its fall. But by the time it landed in a huge wrinkled pile on the floor, all seven had somehow managed to back completely out of its way.

 From behind the heap came the sharp hiss of their weapons, and Luke ducked back involuntarily before he realized the webbing sprays weren't coming anywhere near him. Instead, the misty tendrils were sweeping outward, shooting around and past the downed tapestry to crisscross the walls.

 His first thought was that the weapons must have gone off accidentally, jostled or bumped as the aliens tried to get out from under the falling tapestry. But a split second later he realized the truth: that they were deliberately webbing the other tapestries into place on the walls to prevent him from trying the same trick twice. Belatedly, Luke tugged at the heaped tapestry, hoping to sweep them back with it, and found that it, too, was now solidly webbed in place.

 The spraying ceased, and a single dark eye poked cautiously around the tapestry mountain... and with a strange sort of sadness, Luke realized that he no longer had any choices left. There was, now, only one way to end this if Han and Leia were to be saved.

 He locked his lightsaber on and let his mind relax, reaching out with Jedi senses toward the seven figures, forming their image in his mind's eye. The alien watching him brought his weapon around the edge of the tapestry

 And, reaching back over his left shoulder, Luke hurled his lightsaber with all his strength.

 The blade scythed toward the edge of the tapestry, spinning through the air like some strange and fiery predator. The alien saw it, reflexively ducked back

 And died as the lightsaber sliced through the tapestry and cut him in half.

 The others must have realized in that instant that they, too, were dead; but even then they didn't give up. Howling a strangely chilling wail, they attacked: four throwing themselves around the sides of the barrier, the other two actually leaping straight up to try to shoot over it.

 It made no difference. Guided by the Force, the spinning lightsaber cut through their ranks in a twisting curve, striking each of them in turn.

 A heartbeat later, it was all over.

 Luke took a shuddering breath. He'd done it. Not the way he'd wanted to, but he'd done it. Now, he could only hope he'd done it in time. Calling the lightsaber back to his hand on a dead run, he sprinted past the crumpled alien bodies and stretched out again through the Force.Leia?

 

 The decorative columns flanking the downward ramp were visible just beyond the next row of booths when, beside him, Han felt Leia twitch. "He's free," she said. "He's on his way."

 "Great," Han muttered. "Great. Let's hope our pals don't find out before he gets here."

 The words were barely out of his mouth when, in what looked like complete unison, the circle of aliens raised their stokhli sticks and started pushing their way through the milling crowd of Bimms. "Too late," Han gritted. "Here they come."

 Leia gripped his arm. "Should I try to take their weapons away from them?"

 "You'll never get all eleven," Han told her, looking around desperately for inspiration.

 His eyes fell on a nearby table loaded with jewelry display boxes... and he had it. Maybe. "Leiathat jewelry over there? Grab some of it."

 He sensed her throw a startled look up at him. "What?"

 "Just do it!" he hissed, watching the approaching aliens. "Grab it and throw it to me."

 Out of the corner of his eye he saw one of the smaller display boxes stir as she strained to establish a grip on it. Then, with a sudden lurch, it leaped toward him, slapping into his hands and scattering small neckpieces to the ground before he managed to get hold of the rest.

 And abruptly the raucous conversational hum of the marketplace was split by a piercing shriek. Han turned toward it, just in time to see the owner of the pilfered merchandise stabbing two fingers toward him. "Han!" he heard Leia shout over the scream.

 "Get ready to duck!" he shouted back

 And was literally bowled off his feet as a yellow wave of enraged Bimms leaped atop him, knocking the accused shoplifter to the ground.

 And with their bodies forming a barrier between him and the stokhli sticks, he dropped the jewelry and grabbed for his comlink. "Chewie!" he bellowed over the din.

 

 Luke heard the shriek even from the top Tower floor; and from the sudden turmoil in Leia's mind, it was instantly clear that he would never make it to the marketplace in time.

 He skidded to a halt, mind racing. Across the room a large open window faced the open-domed structure; but five floors was too far for even a Jedi to safely leap. He glanced back to the room he'd just left, searching for possibilities... and his eye fell on the end of one of the aliens' weapons, just visible through the archway.

 It was a long shot, but it was as good a chance as he was going to get. Reaching out through the Force, he called the weapon flying to his hand, studying its controls as he ran to the window. They were simple enough: spray profile and pressure, plus the thumb trigger. Setting for the narrowest spray and the highest pressure, he braced himself against the side of the window, aimed for the marketplace's partial dome covering, and fired.

 The stick kicked harder against his shoulder than he'd expected it to as the spray shot out, but the results were all he could have hoped for. The front end of the arching tendril struck the roof, forming a leisurely sort of pile as more of the semisolid spray pushed forward to join it. Luke held the switch down for a count of five, then eased up, keeping a firm Force grip on the near end of the tendril to prevent it from falling away from the stick. He gave it a few seconds to harden before touching it tentatively with a finger, gave it a few seconds more to make sure it was solidly attached to the marketplace roof. Then, taking a deep breath, he grabbed his makeshift rope with both hands and jumped.

 A tornado of air blew at him, tugging at his hair and clothes as he swung down and across. Below and partway across the top level he could see the mass of yellow-clad Bimms and the handful of gray figures struggling to get past them to Han and Leia. There was a flicker of light, visible even in the bright sunshine, and one of the Bimms slumped to the groundstunned or dead, Luke couldn't tell which. The floor was rushing up at himhe braced himself to land

 And with a roar that must have rattled windows for blocks around, theMillennium Falcon screamed by overhead.

 The shock wave threw Luke's landing off, sending him sprawling across the floor and into two of the Bimms. But even as he rolled back up to his feet, he realized that Chewbacca's arrival couldn't have been better timed. Barely ten meters away, the two alien attackers nearest him had turned their attention upward, their weapons poised to ensnare theFalcon when it returned. Snatching his lightsaber from his belt, Luke leaped over a half dozen bystanding Bimms, cutting both attackers down before they even knew he was there.

 From overhead came another roar; but this time Chewbacca didn't simply fly theFalcon past the marketplace. Instead, forward maneuvering jets blasting, he brought it to a hard stop. Hovering directly over his beleaguered companions, swivel blaster extended from the ship's underside, he opened fire.

 The Bimms weren't stupid. Whatever Han and Leia had done to stir up the hornet's nest, the hornets themselves clearly had no desire to get shot at from the sky. In an instant the roiling yellow mass dissolved, the Bimms abandoning their attack and streaming away in terror from theFalcon . Forcing his way through the crowd, using the Bimms for visual cover as much as he could, Luke started around the attackers' circle.

 Between his lightsaber and theFalcon 's swivel blaster, they made a very fast, very clean sweep of it.

 

 "You," Luke said with a shake of his head, "are a mess."

 "I'm sorry, Master Luke," Threepio apologized, his voice almost inaudible beneath the layers of hardened spraynet that covered much of his upper body like some bizarre sort of gift wrapping. "I seem to always be causing you trouble."

 "That's not true, and you know it," Luke soothed him, considering the small collection of solvents arrayed in front of him on theFalcon 's lounge table. So far none of the ones he'd tried had been even marginally effective against the webbing. "You've been a great help to all of us over the years. You just have to learn when to duck."

 Beside Luke, Artoo twittered something. "No, Captain Solo didnot tell me to duck," Threepio told the squat droid stiffly. "What he said was, 'Get ready to duck.' I should think the difference would be apparent even to you."

 Artoo beeped something else. Threepio ignored it. "Well, let's try this one," Luke suggested, picking up the next solvent in line. He was hunting for a clean cloth among his pile of rejects when Leia came into the lounge.

 "How is he?" she asked, walking over and peering at Threepio.

 "He'll be all right," Luke assured her. "He may have to stay like this until we get back to Coruscant, though. Han told me these stokhli sticks are used mostly by big-game hunters on out-of-the-way planets, and the spraynet they use is a pretty exotic mixture." He indicated the discarded solvent bottles.

 "Maybe the Bimms can suggest something," Leia said, picking up one of the bottles and looking at its label. "We'll ask them when we get back down."

 Luke frowned at her. "We're going back down?"

 She frowned at him in turn. "We have to, Lukeyou know that. This is a diplomatic mission, not a pleasure cruise. It's considered bad form to pull out right after one of your ships has just shot up a major local marketplace."

 "I would think the Bimms would consider themselves lucky that none of their people got killed in the process," Luke pointed out. "Particularly when what happened was at least partly their fault."

 "You can't blame a whole society for the actions of a few individuals," Leia saidrather severely, Luke thought. "Especially not when a single political maverick has simply made a bad decision."

 "A baddecision ?" Luke snorted. "Isthat what they're calling it?"

 "That's what they're calling it," Leia nodded. "Apparently, the Bimm who led us into the marketplace trap was bribed to take us there. He had no idea what was going to happen, though."

 "And I suppose he had no idea what the stuff he gave the chief negotiator would do, either?"

 Leia shrugged. "Actually, there's still no hard evidence that he or anyone else poisoned the negotiator," she said. "Though under the circumstances, they're willing to concede that that's a possibility."

 Luke made a face. "Generous of them. What does Han have to say about us putting back down?"

 "Han doesn't have any choice in the matter," Leia said firmly. "This ismy mission, not his."

 "That's right," Han agreed, stepping into the lounge. "Your mission. Butmy ship."

 Leia stared at him, a look of disbelief on her face. "You didn't," she breathed.

 "I sure did," he told her calmly, dropping into one of the seats across the lounge. "We made the jump to lightspeed about two minutes ago. Next stop, Coruscant."

 "Han!" she flared, as angry as Luke had ever seen her. "I told the Bimms we were coming right back down."

 "And I told them there'd be a short delay," Han countered. "Like long enough for us to collect a squadron of X-wings or maybe a Star Cruiser to bring back with us."

 "And what if you've offended them?" Leia snapped. "Do you have anyidea how much groundwork went into this mission?"

 "Yeah, as it happens, I do," Han said, his voice hardening. "I also have a pretty good idea what could happen if our late pals with the stokhli sticks brought friends with them."

 For a long minute Leia stared at him, and Luke sensed the momentary anger fading from her mind. "You still shouldn't have left without consulting me first," she said.

 "You're right," Han conceded. "But I didn't want to take the time. If theydid have friends, those friends probably had a ship." He tried a tentative smile. "There wasn't time to discuss it in committee."

 Leia smiled lopsidedly in return. "I amnot a committee," she said wryly.

 And with that, the brief storm passed and the tension was gone. Someday, Luke promised himself, he would get around to asking one of them just what that particular private joke of theirs referred to. "Speaking of our pals," he said, "did either of you happen to ask the Bimms who or what they were?"

 "The Bimms didn't know," Leia said, shaking her head. I've certainly never seen anything like them before."

 "We can check the Imperial archives when we get back to Coruscant," Han said, feeling gingerly at one cheek where a bruise was already becoming visible. "There'll be a record of them somewhere."

 "Unless," Leia said quietly, "they're something the Empire round out in the Unknown Regions."

 Luke looked at her. "You think the Empire was behind this?"

 "Who else could it have been?" she said. "The only question is why."

 "Well, whatever the reason, they're going to be disappointed," Han told her, getting to his feet. "I'm going back to the cockpit, see if I can muddle our course a little more. No point in taking chances."

 A memory flashed through Luke's mind: Han and theFalcon , sweeping right through the middle of that first Death Star battle to shoot Darth Vader's fighters off his back. "Hard to imagine Han Solo not wanting to take chances," he commented.

 Han leveled a finger at him. "Yeah, well, before you get cocky, try to remember that the people I'm protecting are you, your sister, your niece, and your nephew. That make any difference?"

 Luke smiled. "Touche," he admitted, saluting with an imaginary lightsaber.

 "And speaking of that," Han added, "isn't it about time Leia had a lightsaber of her own?"

 Luke shrugged. "I can make her one anytime she's ready," he said, looking at his sister. "Leia?"

 Leia hesitated. "I don't know," she confessed. "I've never really felt comfortable with the things." She looked at Han. "But I suppose I ought to make the effort."

 "I think you should," Luke agreed. "Your talents may lie along a different direction, but you should still learn all the basics. As far as I can tell, nearly all the Jedi of the Old Republic carried lightsabers, even those who were primarily healers or teachers."

 She nodded. "All right," she said. "As soon as my work load lightens up a little."

 "Beforeyour work load lightens," Han insisted. "I mean that, Leia. All these wonderful diplomacy skills of yours aren't going to do you or anyone else any good if the Empire locks you away in an interrogation room somewhere."

 Reluctantly, Leia nodded again. "I suppose you're right. As soon as we get back, I'll tell Mon Mothma she's just going to have to cut down on my assignments." She smiled at Luke. "I guess semester break's over, Teacher."

 "I guess so," Luke said, trying to hide the sudden lump inhis throat.

 Leia noticed it anyway; and, for a wonder, misinterpreted it. "Oh, come on," she chided gently. "I'm notthat bad a student. Anyway, look on it as good practiceafter all, someday you'll have to teach all this to the twins, too."

 "I know," Luke said softly.

 "Good," Han said. "That's settled, then. I'm heading up; see you later."

 " 'Bye," Leia said. "Now" She turned to give Threepio a critical look. "Let's see what we can do about all this goop."

 Leaning back in his seat, Luke watched her tackle the hardened webbing, a familiar hollow pain in the pit of his stomach.I took it upon myself, Ben Kenobi had said about Darth Vader,to train him as a Jedi. I thought that I could instruct him just as well as Yoda.

 I was wrong.

 The words echoed through Luke's mind, all the way back to Coruscant.

 

 Chapter 8

 For a long minute Grand Admiral Thrawn sat in his chair, surrounded by his holographic works of art, and said nothing. Pellaeon kept himself at a motionless attention, watching the other's expressionless face and glowing red eyes and trying not to think about the fate couriers of bad news had often suffered at the hands of Lord Vader. "All died but the coordinator, then?" Thrawn asked at last.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon confirmed. He glanced across the room, to where C'baoth stood studying one of the wall displays, and lowered his voice a bit. "We're still not entirely sure what went wrong."

 "Instruct Central to give the coordinator a thorough debriefing," Thrawn said. "What report from Wayland?"

 Pellaeon had thought they'd been talking too quietly for C'baoth to hear them. He was wrong. "Is that it, then?" C'baoth demanded, turning away from the display and striding over to tower over Thrawn's command chair. "Your Noghri have failed; so too bad, and on to more pressing business? You promised me Jedi, Grand Admiral Thrawn."

 Thrawn gazed coolly up at him. "I promised you Jedi," he acknowledged. "And I will deliver them." Deliberately, he turned back to Pellaeon. "What report from Wayland?" he repeated.

 Pellaeon swallowed, trying hard to remember that with ysalamiri scattered all through the command room, C'baoth had no power whatsoever. At least for the moment. "The engineering team has finished its analysis, sir," he told Thrawn. "They report that the cloaking shield schematics seem complete, but that to actually build one will take some time. It'll also be highly expensive, at least for a ship the size of theChimaera ."

 "Fortunately, they won't have to start with anything nearly this big," Thrawn said, handing Pellaeon a data card. "Here are the specs for what we'll need at Sluis Van."

 "The shipyards?" Pellaeon frowned, taking the data card. The Grand Admiral had so far been very secretive about both his goals and the strategy for that attack.

 "Yes. Oh, and we're also going to need some advanced mining machinesmole miners, I believe they're informally called. Have Intelligence start a records search; we'll need a minimum of forty."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon made a note on his data pad. "One other thing, sir." He threw a quick glance at C'baoth. "The engineers also report that nearly eighty percent of the Spaarti cylinders we'll need are functional or can be restored to working order with relative ease."

 "Spaarti cylinders?" C'baoth frowned. "What are those?"

 "Just that other little bit of technology I was hoping to find in the mountain," Thrawn soothed him, throwing a quick warning look in Pellaeon's direction. An unnecessary precaution; Pellaeon had already decided that discussing Spaarti cylinders with C'baoth would not be a smart thing to do. "So. Eighty percent. That's excellent, Captain. Excellent." A gleam came into those glowing eyes. "How very thoughtful of the Emperor to have left such fine equipment for us to rebuild his Empire with. What about the mountain's power and defense systems?"

 "Also operational, for the most part," Pellaeon said. "Three of the four reactors have already been brought on line. Some of the more esoteric defenses seem to have decayed, but what's left should defend the storehouse more than adequately."

 "Again, excellent," Thrawn nodded. The brief flicker of emotion was gone, and he was all cool business again. "Instruct them to begin bringing the cylinders to full operational status. TheDeath's Head should arrive within two or three days with the extra specialists and two hundred ysalamiri they'll need to get things started. At that point" he smiled faintly "we'll be ready to begin the operation in earnest. Beginning with the Sluis Van shipyards."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon glanced at C'baoth again. "And about Skywalker and his sister?"

 "We'll use Team Four next," the Grand Admiral said. "Transmit a message telling them to withdraw from their current assignment and stand ready for further orders."

 "You wantme to transmit the message, sir?" Pellaeon asked. "Not that I'm questioning the order," he added hastily. "But in the past you've usually preferred to contact them yourself."

 Thrawn's eyebrows lifted slightly. "Team Eight failed me," he said softly. "Sending the message through you will let the others know how displeased I am."

 "And when Team Four also fails you?" C'baoth put in. "They will, you know. Will you be merelydispleased with them, too? Or will you admit your professional killing machines simply can't handle a Jedi?"

 "They've never yet met any foe they can't handle, Master C'baoth," Thrawn said coolly. "One group or another will succeed. Until then" He shrugged. "A few Noghri, more or less, won't seriously drain our resources."

 Pellaeon winced, throwing a reflexive glance at the chamber door. Rukh, he suspected, wouldn't be nearly that phlegmatic about the casually proposed deaths of some of his people. "On the other hand, Admiral, this attempt will have put them on their guard," he pointed out.

 "He's right," C'baoth said, jabbing a finger in Pellaeon's direction. "You can't fool a Jedi twice with the same trick."

 "Perhaps," Thrawn said, the word polite but his tone not conceding anything. "What alternative do you suggest? That we concentrate on his sister and leave him alone?"

 "Thatyou concentrate on his sister, yes," C'baoth agreed loftily. "I think it best that I deal with the young Jedi myself."

 Again, the eyebrows went up. "And how would you propose to do that?"

 C'baoth smiled. "He is a Jedi; I am a Jedi. If I call, he will come to me."

 For a long moment Thrawn looked up at him. "I need you with my fleet," he said at last. "Preparations for the assault on the Rebellion's Sluis Van space dock facilities have already begun. Some of the preliminaries to that assault will require a Jedi Master's coordination."

 C'baoth drew himself up to his full height. "My assistance was promised only uponyour promise to deliver my Jedi to me. I will have them, Grand Admiral Thrawn."

 Thrawn's glowing eyes bored into C'baoth's. "Does a Jedi Master go back on his word, then? You knew that obtaining Skywalker for you might take some time."

 "All the more reason for me to begin now," C'baoth shot back.

 "Why can't we do both?" Pellaeon cut in.

 Both looked at him. "Explain, Captain," Thrawn ordered, a hint of threat audible in his tone.

 Pellaeon gritted his teeth, but it was too late to back out now. "We could begin by starting rumors of your presence somewhere, Master C'baoth," he said. "Some sparsely populated world where you might have lived for years without anyone really noticing. Rumors of that sort would be certain to make their way back to the New Rep to the Rebellion," he corrected, glancing at Thrawn. "Particularly with the name Jorus C'baoth attached to them."

 C'baoth snorted. "And you think that on the strength of an idle rumor he'll rush foolishly to find me?"

 "Let him be as cautious as he likes," Thrawn said thoughtfully, the threat gone from his voice. "Let him bring half the Rebellion's forces with him, if he chooses. There will be nothing there to connect you to us."

 Pellaeon nodded. "And while we find a suitable planet and start the rumors into motion, you can remain here to assist with the Sluis Van preliminaries. Hopefully, their response to our activities will keep Skywalker too busy to check out the stories until after the Sluis Van part is over."

 "And if not," Thrawn added, "we'll know when he makes his move, and in plenty of time to get you there ahead of him."

 "Hmm," C'baoth murmured, stroking his long beard, his gaze drifting off to infinity. Pellaeon held his breath... and after a minute the other abruptly nodded. "Very well," he said. "The plan is sound. I will go to my chambers now, Grand Admiral Thrawn, and choose a world from which to make my appearance." With an almost regal nod to each of them, he strode out.

 "Congratulations, Captain," Thrawn said, eyeing Pellaeon coolly. "Your idea seems to have caught Master C'baoth's fancy."

 Pellaeon forced himself to meet that gaze. "I apologize, Admiral, if I spoke out of turn."

 Thrawn smiled faintly. "You served too long under Lord Vader, Captain," he said. "I have no qualms about accepting a useful idea merely because it wasn't my own. My position and ego are not at stake here."

 Except, perhaps, when dealing with C'baoth..."Yes, sir," Pellaeon said aloud. "With your permission, Admiral, I'll go prepare those transmissions to the Wayland and Noghri teams."

 "At your convenience, Captain. And continue to monitor the preparations for the Sluis Van operation." Thrawn's glowing eyes seemed to bore into his. "Monitor them closely, Captain. With Mount Tantiss and Sluis Van both, the long path to victory over the Rebellion will have begun. With, or even without, our Jedi Master."

 

 In theory, Inner Council meetings were supposed to be a quieter, more casual sort of encounter than the more formal Provisional Council things. In actual practice, Han had long ago found out, an Inner Council grilling could be just as rough as being raked over the fires by the larger group.

 "Let me get this straight, then, Captain Solo," Borsk Fey'lya said with his usual oily politeness. "You, alone, and without consultation with anyone in official authority, made the decision to cancel the Bimmisaari mission."

 "I've already said that," Han told him. He felt like suggesting to the Bothan that he pay better attention. "I've also stated my reasons for doing so."

 "Which, in my opinion, were good and proper ones," Admiral Ackbar's gravelly voice interjected in Han's support. "Captain Solo's duty at that point was abundantly clear: to protect the ambassador in his charge and to return safely to alert us."

 "Alert us to what?" Fey'lya countered. "Forgive me, Admiral, but I don't understand what exactly this threat is we're supposedly facing. Whoever these gray-skinned beings were, they clearly weren't considered important enough by the Old Senate to even be included in the records. I doubt a race that insignificant is likely to be capable of mounting a major offensive against us."

 "We don'tknow that that's the reason they aren't in the records," Leia put in. "It could simply be an oversight or gap damage."

 "Or else a deliberate erasure," Luke said.

 Fey'lya's fur rippled, indicating polite disbelief. "And why would the Imperial Senate want to erase the records of an entire race's existence?"

 "I didn't say it was necessarily the Senate's idea," Luke said. "Maybe the aliens themselves destroyed their records."

 Fey'lya sniffed. "Farfetched. Even if it was possible, why would anyone want to do it?"

 "Perhaps Councilor Organa Solo can answer that," Mon Mothma interjected calmly, looking at Leia. "You were more involved in the informational side of the Imperial Senate than I was, Leia. Would such a manipulation have been possible?"

 "I really don't know," Leia said, shaking her head. "I never got all that deeply into the actual mechanics of how the Senate's records were handled. Common wisdom, though, would suggest that it's impossible to create a security system that can't be broken by someone determined enough to do it."

 "That still doesn't answer the question of why these aliens of yours would be that determined," Fey'lya sniffed.

 "Maybe they saw the Old Republic's coming demise," Leia told him, her voice starting to sound a little irritated. "They might have erased all references to themselves and their world in hopes the rising Empire might not notice them."

 Fey'lya was fast, all right; Han had to give him that. "In that case," the Bothan smoothly switched gears, "perhaps a fear of rediscovery was all that motivatedthis attack, as well." He looked at Ackbar. "Regardless, I see no reason to make a full-fledged military operation out of this. To reduce our glorious forces to the level of a mere diplomatic entourage is an insult to their courage and their fighting spirit."

 "You can dispense with the speeches, Councilor," Ackbar rumbled. "None of our 'glorious forces' are here to be impressed by them."

 "I say only what I feel, Admiral," Fey'lya said, with that air of wounded pride he did so well.

 Ackbar's eyes swiveled toward Fey'lya "I wonder," Leia spoke up quickly, "if we could get back to the original subject here. I presume it hasn't escaped anyone's notice that, whatever their motivation, the aliens were ready and waiting for us when we reached Bimmisaari."

 "We're going to need tighter security for these missions, obviously," Ackbar said. "At both endsyour attackersdid suborn a local Bimm politician, after all."

 "All of which will cost that much more time and effort," Fey'lya murmured, a section of his fur rippling.

 "It can't be helped," Mon Mothma said firmly. "If we don't protect our negotiators, the New Republic will stagnate and wither. Accordingly" she looked at Ackbar "you will detail a force to accompany Councilor Organa Solo on her trip back to Bimmisaari tomorrow."

 Tomorrow?Han threw a sharp look at Leia, got an equally surprised look in return. "Excuse me," he said, raising a finger. "Tomorrow?"

 Mon Mothma looked at him, an expression of mild surprise on her face. "Yes, tomorrow. The Bimms are still waiting, Captain."

 "I know, but"

 "What Han is trying to say," Leia jumped in, "is that I had intended at this meeting to ask for a brief leave of absence from my diplomatic duties."

 "I'm afraid that's impossible," Mon Mothma said with a slight frown. "There's far too much work to be done."

 "We're not talking about a vacation here," Han told her, trying to remember his diplomatic manners. "Leia needs more time to concentrate on her Jedi training."

 Mon Mothma pursed her lips, throwing glances at Ackbar and Fey'lya. "I'm sorry," she said, shaking her head. "I, of all people, recognize the need to add new Jedi to our ranks. But for now there are simply too many urgent demands on our time." She looked at Fey'lya againalmost, Han thought sourly, as if seeking his permission. "In another yearpossibly sooner," she added, glancing at Leia's stomach, "we'll have enough experienced diplomats for you to devote the bulk of your time to your studies. But right now I'm afraid we need you here."

 For a long, awkward moment the room was silent. Ackbar spoke first. "If you'll excuse me, I'll go and have that escort force prepared."

 "Of course," Mon Mothma nodded. "Unless there's something more, we stand adjourned."

 And that was that. Jaw clenched tightly, Han began collecting his data cards together. "You all right?" Leia asked quietly from beside him.

 "You know, it was a lot easier back when we were just taking on the Empire," he growled. He threw a glare across the table at Fey'lya. "At leastthen we knew who our enemies were."

 Leia squeezed his arm. "Come on," she said. "Let's go see if they've gotten Threepio cleaned up yet."

 

 Chapter 9

 The tactical officer stepped up to theChimera 's bridge command station, bringing his heels smartly together. "All units signal ready, Admiral," he reported.

 "Excellent," Thrawn said, his voice glacially calm. "Prepare for lightspeed."

 Pellaeon threw a glance at the Grand Admiral, then returned his attention to the bank of tactical and status readouts facing him. To the readouts, and to the blackness outside that seemed to have swallowed up the rest of Pellaeon's five-ship task force. Three-thousandths of a light-year away, the Bpfassh system's sun was a mere pinprick, indistinguishable from the other stars blazing all around them. Conventional military wisdom frowned on this business of picking a spot just outside the target system as a jumping-off pointit was considered dangerously easy for one or more ships to get lost on the way to such a rendezvous, and it was difficult to make an accurate hyperspace jump over so short a distance. He and Thrawn, in fact, had had a long and barely civilized argument over the idea the first time the Grand Admiral had included it in one of his attack plans. Now, after nearly a year of practice, the procedure had become almost routine.

 Perhaps, Pellaeon thought, theChimera 's crew wasn't as inexperienced as their ignorance of proper military protocol sometimes made them seem.

 "Captain? Is my flagship ready?"

 Pellaeon brought his mind back to the business at hand. All ship defenses showed ready; the TIE fighters in their bays were manned and poised. "TheChimaera is fully at your command, Admiral," he said, the formal question and response a ghostly remembrance of the days when proper military protocol was the order of the day throughout the galaxy.

 "Excellent," Thrawn said. He swiveled in his chair to face the figure seated near the rear of the bridge. "Master C'baoth," he nodded. "Are my other two task forces ready?"

 "They are," C'baoth said gravely. "They await merely my command."

 Pellaeon winced and threw another glance at Thrawn. But the Grand Admiral had apparently decided to let the comment pass. "Then command them," he told C'baoth, reaching up to stroke the ysalamir draped across the framework fastened to his chair. "Captain: begin the count."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon reached to his board, touched the timer switch. Scattered around them, the other ships would be locking onto that signal, all of them counting down together...

 The timer went to zero, and with a flare of starlines through the forward ports, theChimaera jumped.

 Ahead, the starlines faded into the mottling of hyperspace. "Speed, Point Three," the helmsman in the crew pit below called out, confirming the readout on the displays.

 "Acknowledged," Pellaeon said, flexing his fingers once and settling his mind into combat mode as he watched the timer now counting up from zero. Seventy seconds; seventy-four, seventy-five, seventy-six

 The starlines flared again through the mottled sky, and shrank back into stars, and theChimaera had arrived.

 "All fighters: launch," Pellaeon called, throwing a quick look at the tactical holo floating over his display bank. They had come out of hyperspace exactly as planned, within easy striking range of the double planet of Bpfassh and its complicated system of moons. "Response?" he called to the tactical officer.

 "Defending fighters launching from the third moon," the other reported. "Nothing larger visible as yet."

 "Get a location on that fighter base," Thrawn ordered, "and detail theInexorable to move in and destroy it."

 "Yes, sir."

 Pellaeon could see the fighters now, coming at them like a swarm of angry insects. Off on theChimera 's starboard flank, the Star DestroyerInexorable was moving toward their base, its TIE fighter wedge sweeping ahead of it to engage the defenders. "Change course to the farther of the twin planets," he ordered the helmsman. "TIE fighters to set up an advance screen. TheJudicator will take the other planet." He looked at Thrawn. "Any special orders, Admiral?"

 Thrawn was gazing at a mid-distance scan of the twin planets. "Stay with the program for now, Captain," he said. "Our preliminary data appear to have been adequate; you may choose targets at will. Remind your gunners once again that the plan is to hurt and frighten, not obliterate."

 "Relay that," Pellaeon nodded toward the communications station. "Have TIE fighters so reminded, as well."

 Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Thrawn turn. "Master C'baoth?" he said. "What's the status of the attacks in the other two systems?"

 "They proceed."

 Frowning, Pellaeon swiveled around. It had been C'baoth's voice, but so throaty and strained as to be nearly unrecognizable.

 As was, indeed, his appearance.

 For a long moment Pellaeon stared at him, a cold feeling in the pit of his stomach. C'baoth sat with unnatural stiffness, his eyes closed but visibly and rapidly moving behind the lids. His hands gripped the arms of his chair, and his lips were pressed so tightly together that the veins and cords in his neck stood out. "Are you all right, Master C'baoth?" he asked.

 "Save your concern, Captain," Thrawn told him coldly. "He's doing what he enjoys most: controlling people."

 C'baoth made a sound somewhere between a snort and a derisive chuckle. "I told you once, Grand Admiral Thrawn, that this is not true power."

 "So you've said," Thrawn said, his tone neutral. "Can you tell what sort of resistance they're facing?"

 C'baoth's frowning face frowned harder. "Not precisely. But neither force is in danger. That much I can feel in their minds."

 "Good. Then have theNemesis break off from the rest of its group and report back to the rendezvous to await us."

 Pellaeon frowned at the Grand Admiral. "Sir?"

 Thrawn turned to him, a warning gleam in his glowing eyes. "Attend to your duties, Captain," he said.

 and with a sudden flash of insight, Pellaeon realized that this multiedged attack on New Republic territory was more than simply part of the setup for the Sluis Van raid. It was, in addition, a test. A test of C'baoth's abilities, yes; but also a test of his willingness to accept orders. "Yes, Admiral," Pellaeon murmured, and turned back to his displays.

 TheChimaera was in range now, and tiny sparks started to appear on the tactical holo as the ship's huge turbolaser batteries began firing. Communications stations flared and went black; planetside industrial targets flared, went dark, then flared again as secondary fires were ignited. A pair of oldCarrack -class light cruisers swept in from starboard, theChimera 's TIE fighter screen breaking formation to engage them. Off in the distance, theStormhawk 's batteries were blazing against an orbiting defense platform; and even as Pellaeon watched, the station flared into vapor. The battle seemed to be going well.

 Remarkably well, in fact...

 An unpleasant feeling began to stir in the pit of Pellaeon's stomach as he checked his board's real-time status readout. Thus far the Imperial forces had lost only three TIE fighters and sustained superficial damage to the Star Destroyers, compared to eight of the enemy's line ships and eighteen of its fighters gone. Granted, the Imperials vastly outgunned the defenders. But still...

 Slowly, reluctantly, Pellaeon reached to his board. A few weeks back he'd made up a statistical composite of theChimera 's battle profiles for the past year. He called it up, superimposed it over the current analysis.

 There was no mistake. In every single category and subcategory of speed, coordination, efficiency, and accuracy, theChimaera and its crew were running no less than 40 percent more effective than usual.

 He turned to look at C'baoth's strained face, an icy shiver running up his back. He'd never really bought into Thrawn's theory as to how and why the Fleet had lost the Battle of Endor. Certainly he'd neverwanted to believe it. But now, suddenly, the issue was no longer open to argument.

 And with the bulk of his attention and power on the task of mentally communicating with two other task forces nearly four light-years away, C'baoth still had enough left to do all this.

 Pellaeon had wondered, with a certain private contempt, just what had given the old man the right to add the wordMaster to his title. Now, he knew.

 "Getting another set of transmissions," the communications officer reported. "A new group of midrange planetary cruisers launching."

 "Have theStormhawk move to intercept," Thrawn ordered.

 "Yes, sir. We've now also pinpointed the location of their distress transmissions, Admiral."

 Shaking away his musings, Pellaeon glanced across the holo. The newly flashing circle was on the farthest of the system's moons. "Order Squadron Four to move in and destroy it," he ordered.

 "Belay that," Thrawn said. "We'll be long gone before any reinforcements can arrive. We might as well let the Rebellion waste its resources rushing useless forces to the rescue. In fact" the Grand Admiral consulted his watch "I believe it's time for us to take our leave. Order fighters back to their ships; all ships to lightspeed as soon as their fighters are aboard."

 Pellaeon tapped keys at his station, giving theChimera 's status a quick prelightspeed check. Another bit of conventional military wisdom was that Star Destroyers should play the role of mobile siege stations in this kind of full-planet engagement; that to employ them in hit-and-fade operations was both wasteful and potentially dangerous.

 But then, proponents of such theories had obviously never watched someone like Grand Admiral Thrawn in action.

 "Order the other two forces to break off their attacks, as well," Thrawn told C'baoth. "I presume you are in close enough contact to do that?"

 "You question me too much, Grand Admiral Thrawn," C'baoth said, his voice even huskier than it had been earlier. "Far too much."

 "I question all that is not yet familiar to me," Thrawn countered, swiveling back around again. "Call them back to the rendezvous point."

 "As you command," the other hissed.

 Pellaeon glanced back at C'baoth. Testing the other's abilities under combat conditions was all good and proper. But there was such a thing as pushing too far.

 "He must learn who's in command here," Thrawn said quietly, as if reading Pellaeon's thoughts.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded, forcing his voice to remain steady. Thrawn had proved time and again that he knew what he was doing. Still, Pellaeon couldn't help but wonder uneasily if the Grand Admiral recognized the extent of the power he'd awakened from its sleep on Wayland.

 Thrawn nodded. "Good. Have there been any further leads on those mole miners I asked for?"

 "Ahno, sir." A year ago, too, he would have found a strange unreality in conversing about less than urgent matters while in the middle of a combat situation. "At least not in anything like the numbers you want. I think the Athega system's still our best bet. Or it will be if we can find a way around the problems of the sunlight intensity there."

 "The problems will be minimal," Thrawn said with easy confidence. "If the jump is done with sufficient accuracy, thejudicator will be in direct sunlight for only a few minutes each way. Its hull can certainly handle that much. We'll simply need to take a few days first to shield the viewports and remove external sensors and communications equipment."

 Pellaeon nodded, swallowing his next question. There would, of course, be none of the difficulties that would normally arise from blinding and deafening a Star Destroyer in that way. Not as long as C'baoth was with them.

 "Grand Admiral Thrawn?"

 Thrawn turned around. "Yes, Master C'baoth?"

 "Where are my Jedi, Grand Admiral Thrawn? You promised me that your tame Noghri would bring me my Jedi."

 Out of the corner of his eye, Pellaeon saw Rukh stir. "Patience, Master C'baoth," Thrawn told him. "Their preparations took time, but they're now complete. They await merely the proper time to act."

 "That time had best be soon," C'baoth warned him. "I grow tired of waiting."

 Thrawn threw a glance at Pellaeon, a quietly smoldering look in his glowing red eyes. "As do we all," he said quietly.

 

 Far ahead of the freighterWild Karrde , one of the Imperial Star Destroyers centered in the cockpit's forward viewport gave a flicker of pseudomotion and disappeared. "They're leaving," Mara announced.

 "What, already?" Karrde said from behind her, his voice frowning.

 "Already," she confirmed, keying the helm display for tactical. "One of the Star Destroyers just went to lightspeed; the others are breaking off and starting prelightspeed maneuvering."

 "Interesting," Karrde murmured, coming up to look out the viewport over her shoulder. "A hit-and-fade attackand with Star Destroyers, yet. Not something you see every day."

 "I heard about something like that happening over at the Draukyze system a couple of months back," the copilot, a bulky man named Lachton, offered. "Same kind of hit-and-fade, except there was only one Star Destroyer on that one."

 "At a guess, I'd say we're seeing Grand Admiral Thrawn's influence on Imperial strategy," Karrde said, his tone thoughtful with just a hint of concern mixed in. "Strange, though. He seems to be taking an inordinate amount of risk for the potential benefits involved. I wonder what exactly he's up to."

 "Whatever it is, it'll be something complicated," Mara told him, hearing the bitterness in her voice. "Thrawn was never one to do things simply. Even back in the old days when the Empire was capable of style or subtlety, he stood out above the rest."

 "You can't afford to be simple when your territory's shrinking the way the Empire's has been." Karrde paused, and Mara could feel him gazing down at her. "You seem to know something about the Grand Admiral."

 "I know something about a lot of things," she countered evenly. "That's why you're grooming me to be your lieutenant, remember?"

 "Touche," he said easily. "there goes another one."

 Mara looked out the viewport in time to see a third Star Destroyer go to lightspeed. One more to go. "Shouldn't we get moving?" she asked Karrde. "That last one will be gone in a minute."

 "Oh, we're scratching the delivery," he told her. "I just thought it might be instructive to watch the battle, as long as we happened to be here at the right time."

 Mara frowned up at him. "What do you mean, we're scratching the delivery? They're expecting us."

 "Yes, they are," he nodded. "Unfortunately, as of right now, the whole system is also expecting a small hornet's nest of New Republic ships. Hardly the sort of atmosphere one would like to fly into with a shipload of contraband materials."

 "What makes you think they'll come?" Mara demanded. "They're not going to be in time to do anything."

 "No, but that's not really the point of such a show," Karrde said. "The point is to score domestic political gains by bustling around, presenting a comforting display of force, and otherwise convincing the locals that something like this can never happen again."

 "And promising to help clean up the wreckage," Lachton put in.

 "That goes without saying," Karrde agreed dryly. "Regardless, it's not a situation we really want to fly into. We'll send a transmission from our next stop telling them we'll try to make delivery again in a week."

 "I still don't like it," Mara insisted. "We promised them we'd do it. Wepromised ."

 There was a short pause. "It's standard procedure," Karrde told her, a touch of curiosity almost hidden beneath the usual urbane smoothness of his voice. "I'm sure they'd prefer late delivery to losing the entire shipment."

 With an effort, Mara forced the black haze of memory away. Promises... "I suppose so," she conceded, blinking her attention back to the control board. While they'd been talking, the last Star Destroyer had apparently gone to lightspeed, leaving nothing behind but enraged and impotent defenders and mass destruction. A mess for the New Republic's politicians and military people to clean up.

 For a moment she gazed out at the distant planets. Wondering if Luke Skywalker might be among those the New Republic would send to help clean up that mess.

 "Whenever you're ready, Mara."

 With an effort, she shook away the thought. "Yes, sir," she said, reaching for the board.Not yet, she told herself silently.Not yet. But soon. Very, very soon.

 

 The remote swooped; hesitated; swooped again; hesitated again; swooped once more and fired. Leia, swinging her new lightsaber in an overlarge arc, was just a shade too slow. "Gah!" she grunted, taking a step backward.

 "You're not giving the Force enough control," Luke told her. "You have to Wait a minute."

 Reaching out with the Force, he put the remote on pause. He remembered vividly that first practice session on theFalcon , when he'd had to concentrate on Ben Kenobi's instructions while at the same time keeping a wary eye on the remote. Doing both together hadn't been easy.

 But perhaps that had been the whole idea. Perhaps a lesson learned under stress was learned better.

 He wished he knew.

 "I'm giving it all the control I can," Leia said, rubbing her arm where the remote's stinger blast had caught her. "I just don't have the proper techniques down yet." She impaled him with a look. "Or else I just wasn't cut out for this sort of fighting."

 "You can learn it," Luke said firmly. "Ilearned it, and I never had any of that self-defense training you got when you were growing up on Alderaan."

 "Maybe that's the problem," Leia said. "Maybe all those old fighting reflexes are getting in my way."

 "I suppose that's possible," Luke admitted, wishing he knew that, too. "In that case, the sooner you start unlearning them, the better. Now: ready"

 The door buzzed. "It's Han," Leia said, stepping away from the remote and closing down her lightsaber. "Come in," she called.

 "Hi," Han said as he walked into the room, glancing in turn at Leia and Luke. He wasn't smiling. "How's the lesson going?"

 "Not bad," Luke said.

 "Don't ask," Leia countered, frowning at her husband. "What's wrong?"

 "The Imperials," Han said sourly. "They just pulled a three-prong hit-and-fade on three systems in the Sluis sector. Some place called Bpfassh and two unpronounceable ones."

 Luke whistled softly. "Three at once. Getting pretty cocky, aren't they?"

 "That seems par for them these days." Leia shook her head, the skin around her eyes tight with concentration. "They're up to something, HanI can feel it. Something big; something dangerous." She waved her hands helplessly. "But I can't for the life of me figure out what it could be."

 "Yeah, Ackbar's been saying the same thing," Han nodded. "Problem is he's got nothing to back it up. Except for the style and tactics, this is all pretty much the same rear-guard harassment the Empire's been pulling for probably the last year and a half."

 "I know," Leia gritted. "But don't sell Ackbar shorthe's got good military instincts. No matter what certain other people say."

 Han cocked an eyebrow. "Hey, sweetheart, I'm onyour side. Remember?"

 She smiled wanly. "Sorry. How bad was the damage?"

 Han shrugged. "Not nearly as bad as it could have been. Especially considering that they hit each place with four Star Destroyers. But all three systems are pretty shook up."

 "I can imagine," Leia sighed. "Let me guess: Mon Mothma wants me to go out there and assure them that the New Republic reallyis able and willing to protect them."

 "How'd you guess?" Han growled. "Chewie's getting theFalcon prepped now."

 "You're not going alone, are you?" Luke asked. "After Bimmisaari"

 "Oh, don't worry," Han said, throwing him a tight smile. "We're not going to be sitting ducks this time. There's a twenty-ship convoy going out to assess the damage, plus Wedge and Rogue Squadron. It'll be safe enough."

 "That's what we said about Bimmisaari, too," Luke pointed out. "I'd better come along."

 Han looked at Leia. "Well, actually... you can't."

 Luke frowned at him. "Why not?"

 "Because," Leia answered quietly, "the Bpfasshi don't like Jedi."

 Han's lip twisted. "The story is that some of their Jedi went bad during the Clone Wars and really mangled things before they were stopped. Or so Mon Mothma says."

 "She's right," Leia nodded. "We were still getting echoes of the whole fiasco in the Imperial Senate when I was serving there. It wasn't just Bpfassh, eithersome of those Dark Jedi escaped and made trouble all throughout the Sluis sector. One of them even got as far as Dagobah before he was caught."

 Luke felt a jolt run through him.Dagobah? "When was that?" he asked as casually as possible.

 "Thirty, thirty-five years ago," Leia said, her forehead creased slightly as she studied his face. "Why?"

 Luke shook his head. Yoda had never mentioned a Dark Jedi ever being on Dagobah. "No reason," he murmured.

 "Come on, we can discuss history later," Han put in. "The sooner we get going, the sooner we can get this over with."

 "Right," Leia agreed, latching her lightsaber to her belt and heading for the door. "I'll get my travel bag and give Winter some instructions. Meet you at the ship."

 Luke watched her leave; turned back to find Han eyeing him. "I don't like it," he told the other.

 "Don't worryshe'll be safe," Han assured him. "Look, I know how protective you're feeling toward her these days. But she can't always have her big brother standing over her."

 "Actually, we've never figured out which of us is older," Luke murmured.

 "Whatever," Han waved the detail away. "The best thing you can do for her right now is what you're already doing. You make her a Jedi, and she'll be able to handle anything the Imperials can throw at her."

 Luke's stomach tightened. "I suppose so."

 "As long as Chewie and me are with her, that is," Han amended, heading for the door. "See you when we get back."

 "Be careful," Luke called after him.

 Han turned, one of those hurt/innocent expressions on his face. "Hey," he said. "It'sme ."

 He left, and Luke was alone.

 For a few moments he wandered around the room, fighting against the heavy weight of responsibility that seemed sometimes on the verge of smothering him. Risking his own life was one thing, but to have Leia's future in his hands was something else entirely. "I'm not a teacher," he called aloud into the empty room.

 The only response was a flicker of movement from the still-paused remote. On sudden impulse, Luke kicked the device to life again, snatching his lightsaber from his belt as it moved to the attack. A dozen stinger blasts shot out in quick succession as the remote swooped like a crazed insect; effortlessly, Luke blocked each in turn, swinging the lightsaber in a flashing arc that seemed to engulf him, a strange exultation flowing through mind and body.This was something he could fightnot distant and shadowy like his private fears, but something solid and tangible. The remote fired again and again, each shot ricocheting harmlessly from the lightsaber blade

 With a sudden beep the remote stopped. Luke stared at it in confusion, wondering what had happened... and abruptly realized he was breathing heavily. Breathing heavily, and sweating. The remote had a twenty-minute time limit built in, and he'd just come to the end of it.

 He closed down the lightsaber and returned it to his belt, feeling a little eerie about what had just happened. It wasn't the first time he'd lost track of time like that, but always before it had been during quiet meditation. The only times it had happened in anything like a combat situation were back on Dagobah, under Yoda's supervision.

 On Dagobah...

 Wiping the sweat out of his eyes with his sleeve, he walked over to the comm desk in the corner and punched up the spaceport. "This is Skywalker," he identified himself. "I'd like my X-wing prepped for launch in one hour."

 "Yes, sir," the young maintenance officer said briskly. "We'll need you to send over your astromech unit first."

 "Right," Luke nodded. He'd refused to let them wipe the X-wing's computer every few months, as per standard procedure. The inevitable result was that the computer had effectively molded itself around Artoo's unique personality, so much so that the relationship was almost up to true droid counterpart level. It made for excellent operational speed and efficiency; unfortunately, it also meant that none of the maintenance computers could talk to the X-wing anymore. "I'll have him there in a few minutes."

 "Yes, sir."

 Luke keyed off and straightened up, wondering vaguely why he was doing this. Surely Yoda's presence would no longer be there on Dagobah for him to talk to or ask questions of.

 But then, perhaps it would.

 

 Chapter 10

 "As you can see," Wedge said, his voice grimly conversational as he crunched through plastic and ceramic underfoot, "the place is something of a mess."

 "That's for sure," Leia agreed, feeling a little sick as she looked around at the flat-bottomed, rubble-strewn crater. A handful of other Republic representatives from her party were wandering around the area, too, holding quiet conversations with their Bpfasshi escorts and occasionally pausing to pick through the pieces of what had once been a major power plant. "How many people died in the attack?" she asked, not at all sure she wanted to hear the answer.

 "In this system, a few hundred," Wedge told her, consulting a data pad. "Not too bad, really."

 "No." Involuntarily, Leia glanced up at the deep blue-green sky above them. Not bad, indeed. Especially considering that there had been no fewer than four Star Destroyers raining destruction down on them. "A lot of damage, though."

 "Yeah," Wedge nodded. "But not nearly as much as there could have been."

 "I wonder why," Han muttered.

 "So does everyone else," Wedge agreed. "It's been the second most popular question around here these days."

 "What's the first?" Leia asked.

 "Let me guess," Han put in before Wedge could answer. "The first is, why did they bother pounding on Bpfassh in the first place."

 "You got it," Wedge nodded again. "It's not like they didn't have any better targets to choose from. You've got the Sluis Van shipyards about thirty light-years away, for startersa hundred ships there at any given time, not to mention the docking facilities themselves. Then there's the Praesitlyn communications station at just under sixty, and four or five major trade centers within a hundred. An extra day of travel each way, tops, at Star Destroyer cruising speeds. So why Bpfassh?"

 Leia thought it over. Itwas a good question. "Sluis Van itself is pretty heavily defended," she pointed out. "Between our Star Cruisers and the Sluissi's own permanent battle stations, any Imperial leader with a gram of sense would think twice before tackling it. And those other systems are all a lot deeper into New Republic space than Bpfassh. Maybe they didn't want to push their luck that far."

 "While they tested their new transmission system under combat conditions?" Han suggested darkly.

 "We don'tknow that they've got a new system," Wedge cautioned him. "Coordinated simultaneous attacks have been done before."

 "No." Han shook his head, looking around. "No, they've got something new. Some kind of booster that lets them punch subspace transmissions through deflector shields and battle debris."

 "I don't think it's a booster," Leia said, a shiver running up her back. Something was starting to tingle, way back at the edge of her mind. "No one in any of the three systems picked up any transmissions."

 Han frowned down at her. "You okay?" he asked quietly.

 "Yes," she murmured, shivering again. "I was just remembering that whenwell, when Darth Vader was having us tortured on Bespin, Luke knew it was happening from wherever he was at the time. And there were rumors that the Emperor and Vader could do that, too."

 "Yeah, but they're both dead," Han reminded her. "Luke said so."

 "I know," she said. The tingling at the edge of her mind was getting stronger... "But what if the Imperials have found another Dark Jedi?"

 Wedge had gotten ahead of them, but now he turned back. "You talking about C'baoth?"

 "What?" Leia frowned.

 "Joruus C'baoth," Wedge said. "I thought I heard you mention Jedi."

 "I did," Leia said. "Who's Joruus C'baoth?"

 "He was one of the major Jedi Masters back in pre-Empire days," Wedge said. "Supposed to have disappeared before the Clone Wars started. I heard a rumor a couple of days ago that he's surfaced again and set up shop on some minor world named Jomark."

 "Right." Han snorted. "And he was just sitting around doing nothing during the Rebellion?"

 Wedge shrugged. "I just report 'em, General. I don't make 'em up."

 "We can ask Luke," Leia said. "Maybe he knows something. Are we ready to move on?"

 "Sure," Wedge said. "The airspeeders are over this way"

 And in a sudden rush of sensation, the tingling in Leia's mind abruptly exploded into certain knowledge. "Han, Wedgeduck!"

 and at the rim of the crater a handful of well-remembered gray-skinned aliens appeared.

 "Cover!" Han shouted to the other Republic reps in the crater as the aliens opened up with blasters. Grabbing Leia's wrist, he dived for the limited protection of a huge but badly twisted plate of shielding metal that had somehow gotten itself dug halfway into the ground. Wedge was right behind them, slamming hard into Leia as he reached cover.

 "Sorry," he panted in apology, yanking out his blaster and turning to throw a cautious look around the edge of their shelter. One look was all he got before a blaster bolt spattered metal near his face and sent him jerking back. "I'm not sure," he said, "but I think we've got trouble."

 "I think you're right," Han agreed grimly. Leia turned to see him, blaster drawn, returning his comlink to his belt with his free hand. "They've learned. This time they're jamming our communications."

 Leia felt cold all over. Way out here, without comlinks, they were as good as helpless. Totally cut off from any possibility of help...

 Her hand, reaching automatically for her stomach, brushed her new lightsaber instead. She pulled it free, a fresh determination pushing past the fear. Jedi or not, experienced or not, she wasn't going to give up without a fight.

 "Sounds like you've run into these guys before," Wedge said, reaching around the barrier to squeeze off a couple of blind shots in the general direction of their attackers.

 "We've met," Han grunted back, trying to get into position for a clear shot. "Haven't really figured out what they want, though."

 Leia reached for her lightsaber's control stud, wondering if she had enough skill yet to block blaster fire... and paused. Over the noise of blasters and crackling metal she could hear a new sound. A very familiar sound... "Han!"

 "I hear it," Han said. "Way to go, Chewie."

 "What?" Wedge asked.

 "That whine you hear is theFalcon ," Han told him, leaning back to look over their shelter. "Probably discovered they were jamming us and put two and two together. Here he comes."

 With a screaming roar the familiar shape of theMillennium Falcon swooped by overhead. It circled once, ignoring the ineffectual blasts ricocheting from its underside, and dropped to a bumpy landing directly between them and their attackers. Peering cautiously around their barrier, Leia saw the ramp lower toward them.

 "Great," Han said, looking past her shoulder. "Okay. I'll go first and cover you from the bottom of the ramp. Leia, you're next; Wedge, you bring up the rear. Stay sharpthey may try to flank us."

 "Got it," Wedge nodded. "Ready when you are."

 "Okay." Han got his feet under him

 "Wait a minute," Leia said suddenly, gripping his arm. "There's something wrong."

 "Rightwe're getting shot at," Wedge put in.

 "I'm serious," Leia snapped. "Something here's not right."

 "Like what?" Han asked, frowning at her. "Come on, Leia, we can't sit here all day."

 Leia gritted her teeth, trying to chase down the feeling tingling through her. It was still so nebulous... and then suddenly she had it. "It's Chewie," she told them. "I can't feel his presence on the ship."

 "He's probably just too far away," Wedge said, a distinct note of impatience in his voice. "Come onhe's going to get the ship shot out from under him if we don't get going."

 "Hang on a minute," Han growled, still frowning at Leia. "He's okay for nowall they're using is hand blasters. Anyway, if things get too hot, he can always use the"

 He broke off, a strange look on his face. A second later, Leia got it, too. "The underside swivel blaster," she said. "Why isn't he using it?"

 "Good question," Han said grimly. He leaned out again, taking a hard look this time... and when he ducked back under cover there was a sardonic half-grin on his face. "Simple answer: that's not theFalcon ."

 "What?" Wedge asked, his jaw dropping a couple of centimeters.

 "It's a fake," Han told him. "I can't believe itthese guys actually dug up another working YT-1300 freighter somewhere."

 Wedge whistled softly. "Boy, they must really want you bad."

 "Yeah, I'm starting to get that impression myself," Han said. "Got any good ideas?"

 Wedge glanced around the edge of the barrier. "I don't suppose running for it qualifies."

 "Not with them sitting out there at the edge of the crater waiting to pick us off," Leia told him.

 "Yeah," Han agreed. "And as soon as they realize we're not going to just walk into their decoy, it'll probably get worse."

 "Is there any way we can at least disable that ship?" Leia asked him. "Keep it from taking off and attacking us from above?"

 "There are lots of ways," he grunted. "The problem is you have to be inside for most of them. The outside shielding isn't great, but it blocks hand blasters just fine."

 "Will it block a lightsaber?"

 He threw a suspicious frown at her. "You're not suggesting...?"

 "I don't think we've got any choice," she told him. "Do we?"

 "I suppose not," he grimaced. "All rightbutI'll go."

 Leia shook her head. "We all go," she said. "We know they want at least one of us aliveotherwise, they'd just have flown by overhead and blasted us. If we all go together, they won't be able to fire. We'll head straight in as if we're going aboard, then split off to the sides at the last second and take cover behind the ramp. Wedge and I can fire up and inside to keep them busy while you take the lightsaber and disable them."

 "I don't know," Han muttered. "I think just Wedge and me should go."

 "No, it has to be all of us," Leia insisted. "That's the only way to guarantee they won't shoot."

 Han looked at Wedge. "What do you think?"

 "I think it's the best chance we're going to get," the other said. "But if we do it, we'd better do it fast."

 "Yeah." Han took a deep breath and handed Leia his blaster. "All right. Give me the lightsaber. Okay; ready... go."

 He ducked out from cover and charged for the ship, crouching down as he ran to avoid the blaster fire crisscrossing the craterthe other Republic reps, Leia noted as she and Wedge followed, doing a good job of keeping the rim attackers busy. Inside the ship she could see a hint of movement, and she gripped Han's blaster a little tighter. A half second in the lead, Han reached the ramp; and swerving suddenly to the side ducked under the hull.

 The aliens must have realized instantly that their trap had failed. Even as Leia and Wedge skidded to a halt at opposite sides of the ramp, they were greeted by a burst of blaster fire from the open hatch. Dropping to the ground, Leia squirmed as far back as she could under the ramp, firing blindly into the hatch to discourage those inside from coming down after them. Across the ramp, Wedge was also firing; somewhere behind her, she could hear a faint scrabbling across the ground as Han got into position for whatever sabotage he was planning. A shot blazed past from above, narrowly missing her left shoulder, and she tried to back a little farther into the ramp's shadow. Behind her, clearly audible through the blaster fire, she heard asnap-hiss as Han ignited her lightsaber. Gritting her teeth, she braced herself, not knowing quite why

 And with a blast and shock wave that knocked her flat against the ground, the whole ship bounced a meter in the air and then slammed back down again.

 Through the ringing in her ears, she heard someone give a war whoop. The firing from the hatch had abruptly stopped, and in the silence she could hear a strange hissing roar coming from above her. Cautiously, she eased away from the ramp and crawled a little ways out of concealment.

 She'd been prepared to see the freighter leaking something as a result of Han's sabotage. She wasn't prepared for the huge white gaseous plume that was shooting skyward like the venting of a ruptured volcano.

 "You like it?" Han asked, easing over beside her and glancing up to admire his handiwork.

 "That probably depends on whether the ship's about to blow up," Leia countered. "What did youdo?"

 "Cut through the coolant lines to the main drive," he told her, retrieving his blaster and handing back her lightsaber. "That's all their pressurized korfaise gas floating away."

 "I thought coolant gases were dangerous to breathe," Leia said, looking warily at the billowing cloud.

 "They are," Han agreed. "But korfaise is lighter than air, so we won't have any trouble down here.Inside the ship is another matter. I hope."

 Abruptly, Leia became aware of the silence around them. "They've stopped shooting," she said.

 Han listened. "You're right. Not just the ones inside the ship, either."

 "I wonder what they're up to," Leia murmured, tightening her grip on the lightsaber.

 A second later she got her answer. A violent thunderclap came from above them, flattening her to the ground with the shock wave. For a horrifying second she thought the aliens had set the ship to self-destruct; but the sound faded away, and the ramp beside her was still intact. "What wasthat ?"

 "That, sweetheart," Han said, pulling himself to his feet, "was the sound of an escape pod being jettisoned." He eased cautiously away from the relative protection of the ramp, scanning the sky. "Probably modified for atmospheric maneuvering. Never realized before how loud those things were."

 "They usually take off in vacuum," Leia reminded him, standing up herself. "So. Now what?"

 "Now" Han pointed "we collect our escort and get out of here."

 "Our escort?" Leia frowned. "What esc?"

 Her question was cut off by the roar of engines as three X-wings shot overhead, wings in attack position and clearly primed for trouble. She looked up at the white tower of korfaise gas... and suddenly understood. "You did that deliberately, didn't you?"

 "Well, sure," Han said, looking innocent. "Why just disable a ship when you can disable itand send up a distress signal at the same time?" He gazed up at the cloud. "You know," he said thoughtfully, "sometimes I still amaze myself."

 

 "I can assure you, Captain Solo," Admiral Ackbar's gravelly voice came over theFalcon 's speaker, "that we are doing everything in our power to find out how this happened."

 "That's what you said four days ago," Han reminded him, trying hard to be civil. It wasn't easy. He'd long since gotten used to being shot at himself, but having Leia under the hammer with him was something else entirely. "Come onthere can't be allthat many people who knew we were coming to Bpfassh."

 "You might be surprised," Ackbar said. "Between the Council members, their staffs, the prep crews at the spaceport, and various security and support personnel, there may be up to two hundred people who had direct access to your itinerary. And that doesn't count friends and colleagues any of those two hundred might have mentioned it to. Tracking through all of them is going to take time."

 Han grimaced. "That's great. May I ask what you suggest we do in the meantime?"

 "You have your escort."

 "We had them four days ago, too," Han countered. "It didn't do us a lot of good. Commander Antilles and Rogue Squadron are fine in a space battle, but this kind of stuff isn't exactly their area of expertise. We'd do better with Lieutenant Page and some of his commandos."

 "Unfortunately, they're all out on assignment," Ackbar said. "Under the circumstances, perhaps it would be best if you simply brought Councilor Organa Solo back here where she can be properly protected."

 "I'd love to," Han said. "The question is whether she'll be any safer on Coruscant than she is here."

 There was a long moment of silence, and Han could imagine Ackbar's huge eyes swiveling in their sockets. "I'm not sure I appreciate the tone of that question, Captain."

 "I don't much like it either, Admiral," Han told him. "But face it: if the Imperials are getting informationout of the Palace, they might just as easily be able to get their agentsin ."

 "I think that highly unlikely," Ackbar said, and there was no missing the frostiness in his tone. "The security arrangements I've set up on Coruscant are quite capable of handling anything the Imperials might try."

 "I'm sure they are, Admiral," Han sighed. "I only meant"

 "We'll let you know when we have further information, Captain," Ackbar said. "Until then, do whatever you feel is necessary. Coruscant out."

 The faint hum of the carrier cut off. "Right," Han muttered under his breath. "Bpfassh out, too."

 For a minute he just sat there in theFalcon 's cockpit, thinking evil thoughts about politics in general and Ackbar in particular. In front of him the displays that normally monitored ship's status were showing views of the landing field around them, with special emphasis on the areas just outside the hatch. The underside swivel blaster was extended and ready, the deflector shields set for hair-trigger activation, despite the fact that the things weren't all that effective inside an atmosphere.

 Han shook his head, a mixture of frustration and disgust in his mouth.Who'd ever have thought, he marveled to himself,that the day would come when I was actually paranoid?

 From the rear of the cockpit came the sound of a soft footstep. Han turned, hand automatically dropping to his blaster

 "It's just me," Leia assured him, coming forward and glancing at the displays. She looked tired. "You finished talking with Ackbar already?"

 "It wasn't much of a conversation," Han told her sourly. "I asked what they were doing to find out how our pals with the blasters knew we were coming here, he assured me they were doing everything possible to find out, I managed to step on his toes, and he signed off in a huff. Pretty much like usual with Ackbar these days."

 Leia gave him a wry smile. "Youdo have a way with people, don't you?"

 "This one's not my fault," Han objected. "All I did was suggest that his security peoplemight not be up to keeping these guys out of the Imperial Palace.He's the one who overreacted."

 "I know," Leia nodded, dropping wearily into the copilot's seat. "For all his military genius, Ackbar just doesn't have the polish to be a good politician. And with Fey'lya nipping at his heels..." She shrugged uncomfortably. "He just gets more and more overprotective of his territory."

 "Yeah, well, if he's trying to keep Fey'lya away from the military, he's got the wrong end of the blaster," Han growled. "Half of them are already convinced that Fey'lya's the guy to listen to."

 "Unfortunately, he often is," Leia conceded. "Charisma and ambition. Dangerous combination."

 Han frowned. There had been something in her voice just then... "What do you mean, dangerous?"

 "Nothing," she said, a guilty look flicking across her face. "Sorrytalking out of turn."

 "Leia, if you know something"

 "I don'tknow anything," she said, in a tone that warned him to drop it. "It's just a feeling I have. A sense that Fey'lya has his eye on more than just Ackbar's job as supreme commander. But it's just a feeling."

 Like the feeling she had that the Empire was up to something big? "Okay," he said soothingly. "I understand. So. You all done here?"

 "As done as I can be," she said, the tiredness back in her voice. "The rebuilding's going to take some time, but the organization for that will have to be handled from Coruscant." She leaned back in her seat and closed her eyes. "Convoys of replacement equipment, consultants and maybe extra workersyou know the sort of thing."

 "Yeah," Han said. "And I suppose you're anxious to get right back and start the ball rolling."

 She opened her eyes and gave him a curious look. "You sound like you're not."

 Han gave the outside displays a thoughtful scan. "Well, it's what everyone's going to expect you to do," he pointed out. "So maybe we ought to do something else."

 "Such as?"

 "I don't know. Find somewhere no one would think to look for you, I guess."

 "And then...?" she asked, her voice ominous.

 Unconsciously, Han braced himself. "And then hole up there for a while."

 "You know I can't do that," she said, her tone just about what he'd expected. "I have commitments back on Coruscant."

 "You've got commitments to yourself, too," he countered. "Not to mention to the twins."

 She glared at him. "That's not fair."

 "Isn't it?"

 She turned away from him, an unreadable expression on her face. "I can't be out of touch, Han," she said quietly. "I just can't. There's too much happening back there for me to bury myself away."

 Han gritted his teeth. They seemed to be running over this same territory a lot lately. "Well, if all you need right now is to keep in touch, how about if we go some place that has a diplomatic station? You'd at least be able to get official Coruscant news there."

 "And how do we make sure the local ambassador doesn't give us away?" She shook her head. "I can't believe I'm talking like this," she muttered. "It's like we're back being the Rebellion again, not the legitimate government."

 "Who says the ambassador has to know?" Han asked. "We've got a diplomatic receiver on theFalcon we can tap into the transmission on our own."

 "Only if we can get hold of the station's encrypt scheme," she reminded him."And then plug it into our receiver. That may not be possible."

 "We can find a way," Han insisted. "At least it would buy Ackbar some time to track down the leak."

 "True." Leia considered, slowly shook her head. "I don't know. The New Republic's encrypt codes are nearly impossible to break."

 Han snorted. "I hate to disillusion you, sweetheart, but there are slicers running around loose who eat government encrypt codes for breakfast. All we have to do is find one of them."

 "And pay him enormous sums of money?" Leia said dryly.

 "Something like that," Han agreed, thinking hard. "On the other hand, even slicers occasionally owe other people favors."

 "Oh?" Leia threw him a sideways look. "I don't suppose you'd know any of them."

 "As a matter of fact, I do." Han pursed his lips. "Trouble is, if the Imperials have done their homework, they probably know all about it and have someone watching him."

 "Meaning...?"

 "Meaning we're going to have to find someone who's got his own list of slicer contacts." He reached over to the console and tapped theFalcon 's comm switch. "Antilles, this is Solo. You copy?"

 "Right here, General," Wedge's voice came back promptly.

 "We're leaving Bpfassh, Wedge," Han told him. "That's not official yetyou're in charge of telling the rest of the delegation about it once we're off the ground."

 "I understand," Wedge said. "You want me to assign you an escort, or would you rather slip out quietly? I've got a couple of people I'd trust all the way to the end of the galaxy."

 Han sent Leia a lopsided smile. Wedge understood, all right. "Thanks, but we wouldn't want the rest of the delegation to feel unprotected."

 "Whatever you want. I can handle anything that needs doing at this end. See you back at Coruscant."

 "Right." Han cut off the comm. "Eventually," he added under his breath as he keyed for intercom. "Chewie? We ready to fly?"

 The Wookiee growled an affirmative. "Okay. Make sure everything's bolted down and then come on up. Better bring Threepio, toowe might have to talk to Bpfasshi Control on the way out."

 "Do I get to know where we're going?" Leia asked as he started the prelaunch sequence.

 "I already told you," Han said. "We need to find someone we can trust who has his own list of illegals."

 A suspicious glint came into her eye. "You don't mean... Lando?"

 "Who else?" Han said innocently. "Upstanding citizen, former war hero, honest businessman. Ofcourse he'll have slicer contacts."

 Leia rolled her eyes skyward. "Why," she murmured, "do I suddenly have a bad feeling about this?"

 

 Chapter 11

 "Hang on, Artoo," Luke called as the first gusts of atmospheric turbulence began to bounce the X-wing around. "We're coming in. Scanners all working okay?"

 There was an affirmative twitter from the rear, the translation appearing across his computer scope. "Good," Luke said, and turned his attention back to the cloud-shrouded planet rushing up to meet them. It was odd, he thought, how it had only been on that first trip in to Dagobah that the sensors had so totally failed on approach.

 Or perhaps not so odd. Perhaps that had been Yoda, deliberately suppressing his instruments so as to be able to guide him unsuspectingly to the proper landing site.

 And now Yoda was gone...

 Firmly, Luke put the thought out of his mind. Mourning the loss of a friend and teacher was both fitting and honorable, but to dwell unnecessarily on that loss was to give the past too much power over the present.

 The X-wing dropped into the lower atmosphere, and within seconds was completely enveloped by thick white clouds. Luke watched the instruments, taking the approach slow and easy. The last time he'd come here, just before the Battle of Endor, he'd made the landing without incident; but just the same, he had no intention of pushing his luck. The landing sensors had Yoda's old homestead pinpointed now. "Artoo?" he called. "Find me a good level spot to set down, will you?"

 In response, a red rectangle appeared on the forward scope, a ways east of the house but within walking distance of it. "Thanks," Luke told the droid, and keyed in the landing cycle. A moment later, with one last mad flurry of displaced tree branches, they were down.

 Slipping off his helmet, Luke popped the canopy. The rich odors of the Dagobah swamp flooded in on him, a strange combination of sweet and decay that sent a hundred memories flashing through his mind. That slow twitch of Yoda's earsthe strange but tasty stew he'd often madethe way that wispy hair of his had tickled Luke's ears whenever he rode on Luke's back during training. The training itself: the long hours, the physical and mental fatigue, the gradually increasing sense of and confidence in the Force, the cave and its dark side images

 The cave?

 Abruptly, Luke stood up in the cockpit, hand going reflexively to his lightsaber as he peered through the haze. Surely he hadn't brought his X-wing down by the cave.

 He had. There, no more than fifty meters away, was the tree that grew from just above that evil place, its huge blackened shape jutting upward through the surrounding trees. Beneath and between its tangled roots, just visible through the mists and shorter vegetation, he could see the dark entrance to the cave itself.

 "Wonderful," he muttered. "Just wonderful." From behind him came an interrogative set of beeps. "Never mind, Artoo," he called over his shoulder, dropping his helmet back onto the seat. "It's all right. Why don't you stay here, and I'll"

 The X-wing rocked, just a bit, and he looked back to find Artoo already out of his socket and working his way gingerly forward. "Or if you'd rather, you can come along," he added wryly.

 Artoo beeped againnot a cheerful beep, exactly, but one that definitely sounded relieved. The little droid hated being left alone. "Hang on," Luke directed him. "I'll get down and give you a hand."

 He jumped down. The ground felt a little squishy beneath his feet, but it was easily firm enough to support the X-wing's weight. Satisfied, he reached out with the Force to lift Artoo from his perch and lower the droid to the ground beside him. "There you go," he said.

 From off in the distance came the long, trilling wail of one of Dagobah's birds. Luke listened as it ran down the scale, eyes searching the swamp around him and wondering why exactly he'd come here. Back on Coruscant it had seemed importanteven vitalthat he do so. But now that he was actually standing here it all seemed hazy. Hazy, and more than a little silly.

 Beside him, Artoo beeped questioningly. With an effort, Luke shook off the uncertainties. "I thought Yoda might have left something behind that we could use," he told the droid, choosing the most easily verbalized of his reasons. "The house should be" he glanced around to get his bearings "that way. Let's go."

 The distance wasn't great, but the trip took longer than Luke had anticipated. Partly it was the general terrain and vegetationhe'd forgotten just how difficult it was to get from one place to another through the Dagobah swamps. But there was something else, too: a low-level but persistent pressure at the back of his mind that seemed to press inward, clouding his ability to think.

 But at last they arrived... to find the house effectively gone.

 For a long minute Luke just stood there, gazing at the mass of vegetation occupying the spot where the house had been, a freshly renewed sense of loss struggling against the embarrassing realization that he'd been a fool. Growing up in the deserts of Tatooine, where an abandoned structure could last for half a century or more, it had somehow never even occurred to him to consider what would happen to that same structure after five years in a swamp.

 Beside him, Artoo twittered a question. "I thought Yoda might have left some tapes or books behind," Luke explained. "Something that would tell me more about the methods of Jedi training. Not much left, though, is there?"

 In response, Artoo extended his little sensor plate. "Never mind," Luke told him, starting forward. "As long as we're here, I guess we might as well take a look."

 It took only a few minutes to cut a path through the bushes and vines with his lightsaber and to reach what was left of the house's outer walls. For the most part they were rubble, reaching only to his waist at their highest, and covered with a crisscrossing of tiny vines. Inside was more vegetation, pushing up against, and in some places through, the old stone hearth. Half buried in the mud were Yoda's old iron pots, covered with a strange-looking moss.

 Behind him, Artoo gave a quiet whistle. "No, I don't think we're going to find anything useful," Luke agreed, squatting down to pull one of the pots out of the ground. A small lizard darted out as he did so, and disappeared into the reedy grass. "Artoo, see if you can find anything electronic around here, will you? I never saw him use anything like that, but..." He shrugged.

 The droid obediently raised his sensor plate again. Luke watched as it tracked back and forth... and suddenly stopped. "Find something?" Luke asked.

 Artoo twittered excitedly, his dome swiveling to look back the way they'd come. "Back that way?" Luke frowned. He looked down at the debris around him. "Not here?"

 Artoo beeped again and turned around, rolling with some difficulty across the uneven surface. Pausing, he swiveled his dome back toward Luke and made a series of sounds that could only have been a question. "Okay, I'm coming," Luke sighed, forcing back the odd sense of dread that had suddenly seized him. "Lead the way."

 

 The sunlight filtering through the leafy canopy overhead had become noticeably dimmer by the time they came within sight of the X-wing. "Now where?" Luke asked Artoo. "I hope you're not going to tell me that all you were picking up was our own ship."

 Artoo swiveled his dome back around, trilling a decidedly indignant denial. His sensor plate turned slightly

 To point directly at the cave.

 Luke swallowed hard. "You're sure?"

 The droid trilled again. "You're sure," Luke said.

 For a minute he just looked across through the mists at the cave, indecision swirling through his mind. There was no genuine need for him to go in thereof that much he was certain. Whatever it was Artoo had detected, it would not be anything Yoda had left behind. Not in there.

 But then what was it? Leia had referred to a Bpfasshi Dark Jedi who'd come here. Could it be something of his?

 Luke gritted his teeth. "Stay here, Artoo," he instructed the droid as he started across to the cave. "I'll be back as soon as I can."

 Fear and anger, Yoda had often warned him, were the slaves of the dark side. Vaguely, Luke wondered which side curiosity served.

 Up close, the tree straddling the cave looked as evil as he remembered it: twisted, dark, and vaguely brooding, as if it was itself alive with the dark side of the Force. Perhaps it was. Luke couldn't tell for sure, not with the overwhelming emanations of the cave flooding his senses. It was, clearly, the source of the low-level pressure he'd felt ever since his arrival on Dagobah, and for a moment he wondered why the effect had never been this strong before.

 Perhaps because Yoda had always been here before, his presence shielding Luke from the true strength of the cave's power. But now Yoda was gone... and Luke was facing the cave alone.

 He took a deep breath.I am a Jedi, he reminded himself firmly. Slipping his comlink from his belt, he thumbed it on. "Artoo? You copy?"

 The comlink trilled back. "Okay. I'm starting in. Give me a signal when I get close to whatever it is you're picking up."

 He got an affirmative-sounding beep. Returning the comlink to his belt, he drew his lightsaber. Taking another deep breath, he ducked under the gnarled tree roots and stepped into the cave.

 This, too, was as bad as he remembered it. Dark, dank, alive with skittering insects and slimy plants, it was generally as unpleasant a place as Luke had ever been in. The footing seemed more treacherous than it had been before, and twice in the first dozen steps he nearly fell on his face as the ground gave way beneath his weight; not badly, but enough to throw him off balance. Through the mists ahead a well-remembered spot loomed, and he found himself gripping his lightsaber all the more tightly as he neared it. On this spot, once, he'd fought a nightmare battle with a shadowy, unreal Darth Vader...

 He reached the place and stopped, fighting back the fear and memories. But this time, to his relief, nothing happened. No hissing breath came from the shadows; no Dark Lord glided forward to confront him. Nothing.

 Luke licked his lips and pulled the comlink off his belt. No; of course there would be nothing. He had already faced that crisishad faced it and conquered it. With Vader redeemed and gone, the cave had nothing further to threaten him with except nameless and unreal fears, and those only if he allowed them to have power over him. He should have realized that from the start. "Artoo?" he called. "You still there?"

 The little droid buzzed in reply. "All right," Luke said, starting forward again. "How far do I have to?"

 And right in the middle of his sentencepractically in the middle of a stepthe haze of the cave abruptly coalesced around him into a flickering, surreal vision...

 He was on a small, open-air ground vehicle, hovering low over some sort of pit. The ground itself was indistinct, but he could feel a terrible heat rising all around him from it. Something poked hard in his back, urging him forward onto a narrow board protruding horizontally from the vehicle's side

 Luke caught his breath, the scene suddenly coming clear. He was back on Jabba the Hutt's skiff, being prepared for his execution in the Great Pit of Carkoon

 Ahead, he could see the shape of Jabba's Sail Barge now, drifting a bit closer as the courtiers jostled one another for a better view of the coming spectacle. Many of the barge's details were indistinct through the dream mists, but he could see clearly the small, dome-topped figure of Artoo at the top of the ship. Awaiting Luke's signal...

 "I'm not going to play this game," Luke called out toward the vision. "I'm not. I've faced this crisis, too, and I've defeated it."

 But his words seemed dead even in his own ears... and even as he spoke them, he could feel the jab of the guard's spear in his back, and could feel himself drop off the end of the plank. In midair he twisted around, grabbing the end of the board and flipping high over the guards' heads

 He landed and turned back toward the Sail Barge, hand extended for the lightsaber Artoo had just sent arcing toward him.

 It never reached him. Even as he stood there waiting for it, the weapon changed direction, curving back toward the other end of the Sail Barge. Frantically, Luke reached out for it with the Force; but to no avail. The lightsaber continued its flight

 And came to rest in the hand of a slender woman standing alone at the top of the barge.

 Luke stared at her, a feeling of horror surging through him. In the mists, with the sun behind her, he could see no details of her face... but the lightsaber she now held aloft like a prize told him all he needed to know. She had the power of the Force... and had just condemned him and his friends to death.

 And as the spears pushed him again onto the plank he heard, clearly through the dream mists, her mocking laughter...

 "No!" Luke shouted; and as suddenly as it had appeared, the vision vanished. He was back in the cave on Dagobah, his forehead and tunic soaked with sweat, a frantic electronic beeping coming from the comlink in his hand.

 He took a shuddering breath, squeezing his lightsaber hard to reassure himself that he did indeed still have it. "It's" He worked moisture into a dry throat and tried again. "It's okay, Artoo," he reassured the droid. "I'm all right. Uh..." He paused, fighting through the disorientation to try to remember what he was doing here. "Are you still picking up that electronic signal?"

 Artoo beeped affirmatively. "Is it still ahead of me?" Another affirmative beep. "Okay," Luke said. Shifting the lightsaber in his hand, he wiped more of the sweat from his forehead and started cautiously forward, trying to watch all directions at once.

 But the cave had apparently done its worst. No more visions rose to challenge his way as he continued deeper in... and at last, Artoo signaled that he was there.

 The device, once he'd finally pried it out of the mud and moss, was a distinct disappointment: a small, somewhat flattened cylinder a little longer than his hand, with five triangular, rust-encrusted keys on one side and some flowing alien script engraved on the other. "This is it?" Luke asked, not sure he liked the idea of having come all the way in here just for something so totally nondescript. "There's nothing else?"

 Artoo beeped affirmatively, and gave a whistle that could only be a question. "I don't know what it is," Luke told the droid. "Maybe you'll recognize it. Hang on; I'm coming out."

 The return trip was unpleasant but also uneventful, and a short time later he emerged from under the tree roots with a sigh of relief into the relatively fresh air of the swamp.

 It had grown dark while he'd been inside, he noted to his mild surprise; that twisted vision of the past must have lasted longer than it had seemed. Artoo had the X-wing's landing lights on; the beams were visible as hazy cones in the air. Wading his way through the ground vegetation, Luke headed toward the X-wing.

 Artoo was waiting for him, beeping quietly to himself. The beeping became a relieved whistle as Luke came into the light, the little droid rocking back and forth like a nervous child. "Relax, Artoo, I'm all right," Luke assured him, squatting down and pulling the flattened cylinder out of his side pocket. "What do you think?"

 The droid chirped thoughtfully, his dome swiveling around to examine the object from a couple of different directions. Then, abruptly, the chirping exploded into an excited electronic jabbering. "What?" Luke asked, trying to read the flurry of sounds and wondering wryly why Threepio was never around when you needed him. "Slow down, Artoo. I can'tnever mind," he interrupted himself, getting to his feet and glancing around in the gathering darkness. "I don't think there's any point in hanging around here anymore, anyway."

 He looked back at the cave, now almost swallowed up by the deepening gloom, and shivered. No, there was no reason to stay... and at least one very good reason to leave. So much, he thought glumly, for finding any kind of enlightenment here. He should have known better. "Come on," he told the droid. "Let's get you back in your socket. You can tell me all about it on the way home."

 

 Artoo's report on the cylinder was, it turned out, fairly short and decidedly negative. The little droid did not recognize the design, could not decipher its function from what his general-purpose scanners could pick up, and didn't even know what language the script on the side was written in, let alone what it said. Luke was beginning to wonder what all the droid's earlier excitement had been about... until the last sentence scrolled across his computer scope.

 "Lando?" Luke frowned, reading the sentence again. "I don't remember ever seeing Lando with anything like this."

 More words scrolled across the scope. "Yes, I realize I was busy at the time," Luke agreed, unconsciously flexing the fingers of his artificial right hand. "Getting fitted with a new hand will do that. So did he give it to General Madine, or was he just showing it to him?"

 Another sentence appeared. "That's okay," Luke assured the droid. "I imagine you were busy, too."

 He looked into his rear display, at the crescent of Dagobah growing ever smaller behind him. He had intended to go straight back to Coruscant and wait for Leia and Han to return from Bpfassh. But from what he'd heard, their mission there could run a couple of weeks or even more. And Lando had invited him more than once to visit his new rare-ore mining operation on the superhot planet of Nkllon.

 "Change in plans, Artoo," he announced, keying in a new course. "We're going to swing over to the Athega system and see Lando. Maybe he can tell us what this thing is."

 And on the way, he'd have time to think about that disturbing dream or vision or whatever it was he'd had in the cave. And to decide whether it had been, in fact, nothing more than a dream.

 

 Chapter 12

 "No, I don't have a transit permit for Nkllon," Han said patiently into theFalcon 's transmitter, glaring across at the modified B-wing running beside them. "I also don't have any accounts here. I'm trying to reach Lando Calrissian."

 From the seat behind him came a sound that might have been a stifled laugh. "You say something?" he asked over his shoulder.

 "No," Leia said innocently. "Just remembering the past."

 "Right," Han growled. He remembered, too; and Bespin wasn't on his list of fond memories. "Look, just give Lando a call, will you?" he suggested to the B-wing. "Tell him that an old friend is here, and thought we might play a hand of sabacc for my choice of his stock. Lando will understand."

 "We want towhat ?" Leia asked, leaning forward around his chair to give him a startled look.

 Han muted the transmitter. "The Imperials might have spies here, too," he reminded her. "If they do, announcing our names to the whole Athega system wouldn't be very smart."

 "Point," Leia conceded reluctantly. "That's a pretty strange message, though."

 "Not to Lando," Han assured her. "He'll know it's meprovided that middle-level button pusher out there loosens up and sends it in."

 Beside him, Chewbacca growled a warning: something big was approaching from aft-starboard. "Any make on it?" Han asked, craning his neck to try to get a look.

 The transmitter crackled back to life before the Wookiee could answer. "Unidentified ship, General Calrissian has authorized a special transit waiver for you," the B-wing said, his tone sounding a little disappointed. He'd probably been looking forward to personally kicking the troublemakers out of his system. "Your escort is moving to intercept; hold your current position until he arrives."

 "Acknowledged," Han said, not quite able to bring himself to thank the man.

 "Escort?" Leia asked cautiously. "Why an escort?"

 "That's what you get for going off and doing politics stuff when Lando drops by the Palace for a visit," Han admonished her, still craning his neck. There it was... "Nkllon's a superhot planetway too close to its sun for any normal ship to get to without getting part of its hull peeled off. Hence" he waved Leia's attention to the right "the escort."

 There was a sharp intake of air from behind him, and even Han, who'd seen Lando's holos of these things, had to admit it was an impressive sight. More than anything else the shieldship resembled a monstrous flying umbrella, a curved dish fully half as big across as an Imperial Star Destroyer. The underside of the dish was ridged with tubes and finspumping and storage equipment for the coolant that helped keep the dish from burning up during the trip inward. Where the umbrella's handle would have been was a thick cylindrical pylon, reaching half as far back as the umbrella dish was wide, its far end bristling with huge radiator fins. In the center of the pylon, looking almost like an afterthought, was the tug ship that drove the thing.

 "Good skies," Leia murmured, sounding stunned. "And it actuallyflies ?"

 "Yeah, but not easily," Han told her, watching with a slight trickle of apprehension as the monstrosity moved ever closer to his ship. It didn't have to move allthat closetheFalcon was considerably smaller than the huge container ships the shieldships normally escorted. "Lando told me they had all sorts of trouble getting the things designed properly in the first place, and almost as much trouble teaching people how to fly them."

 Leia nodded. "I believe it."

 The transmitter crackled again. "Unidentified ship, this is Shieldship Nine. Ready to lock; please transmit your slave circuit code."

 "Right," Han muttered under his breath, touching the transmit switch. "Shieldship Nine, we don't have a slave circuit. Just give me your course and we'll stay with you."

 There was a moment of silence. "Very well, unidentified ship," the voice said at lastreluctantly, Han thought. "Set your course at two-eight-four; speed, point six sublight."

 Without waiting for an acknowledgment, the huge umbrella began to drift off. "Stay with him, Chewie," Han told the copilot. Not that that would be a problem; theFalcon was faster and infinitely more maneuverable than anything that size. "Shieldship Nine, what's our ETA for Nkllon?"

 "You in a hurry, unidentified ship?"

 "How could we be in a hurry, with this wonderful view?" Han asked sarcastically, looking at the underside of the dish that filled pretty much the entire sky. "Yeah, we're in kind of a hurry."

 "Sorry to hear that," the other said. "You see, if you had a slave circuit, we could do a quick hyperspace hop inward together and be at Nkllon in maybe an hour. Doing it this waywell, it'll take us about ten."

 Han grimaced. "Great."

 "We could probably set up a temporary slave circuit," Leia suggested. "Threepio knows theFalcon 's computer well enough to do that."

 Chewbacca half turned toward her, growling a refusal that left no room for argument, even if Han had been inclined to argue. Which he wasn't. "Chewie's right," he told Leia firmly. "We don't slave this ship to anything. Ever. You copy that, shieldship?"

 "Okay by me, unidentified ship," the other said. They all seemed to be taking a perverse pleasure in using that phrase. "I get paid by the hour anyway."

 "Fine," Han said. "Let's get to it."

 "Sure"

 The transmission cut off, and Han poised his hands over the controls. The umbrella was still drifting, but nothing more. "Chewie, has he got his engines off standby yet?"

 The Wookiee rumbled a negative.

 "What's wrong?" Leia asked, leaning forward again.

 "I don't know," Han said, looking around. With the umbrella in the way, there wasn't a lot to see. "I don't like it, though." He tapped the transmitter. "Shieldship Nine, what's the holdup?"

 "Not to worry, unidentified ship," the voice came back soothingly. "We've got another craft coming in that also doesn't have a slave circuit, so we're going to take you both in together. No point in tying up two of us, right?"

 The hairs on the back of Han's neck began to tingle. Another ship that just happened to be coming into Nkllon the same time they were. "You have an ID on that other ship?" he asked.

 The other snorted. "Hey, friend, we don't even have an ID onyou ."

 "You're a big help," Han said, muting the transmitter again. "Chewie, you got an approach yet on this guy?"

 The Wookiee's reply was short and succinct. And disturbing. "Cute," Han growled. "Real cute."

 "I missed that," Leia murmured, looking over his shoulder.

 "He's coming in from the far side of the shieldship's central pylon," Han told her grimly, pointing to the inference brackets on the scanner scope. "Keeping it between him and us where we can't see him."

 "Is he doing it on purpose?"

 "Probably," Han nodded, hitting his restraint release. "Chewie, take over; I'm going to fire up the quads."

 He ran back along the cockpit corridor to the central core and headed up the ladder. "Captain Solo," a nervous mechanical voice called after him from the direction of the lounge. "Is something wrong?"

 "Probably, Threepio," Han shouted back. "Better strap in."

 He got up the ladder, passed through the right-angle gravity discontinuity at the gun well, and dropped himself into the seat. The control board went on with satisfying quickness, as he keyed for power with one hand and grabbed the headset with the other. "Anything yet, Chewie?" he called into his mike.

 The other growled a negative: the approaching craft was still completely hidden by the shieldship's pylon. But the inference scope was now giving a distance reading, and from that the Wookiee had been able to compute an upper size limit for the craft. It wasn't very big. "Well, that's something," Han told him, running through his mental list of starship types and trying to figure out what the Empire might be throwing at them that would be that small. Some variety of TIE fighter, maybe? "Stay sharpthis might be a decoy."

 The inference scope pinged: the unknown ship was starting to come around the pylon. Han braced himself, fingers resting lightly on the fire controls...

 And with a suddenness that surprised him, the ship burst into sight, rounding the pylon in a twisting spiral. It steadied slightly

 "It's an X-wing," Leia identified it, sounding greatly relieved. "With Republic markings"

 "Hello, strangers," Luke's voice crackled into Han's ear. "Good to see you."

 "Uh... hi," Han said, stifling the automatic urge to greet Luke by name. Theoretically, they were on a secure frequency, but it was easy enough for anyone with sufficient motivation to get around such formalities. "What are you doing here?"

 "I came to see Lando," Luke told him. "Sorry if I startled you. When they told me I'd be going in with an unidentified ship I thought it might be a trap. I wasn't completely sure it was you until a minute ago."

 "Ah," Han said, watching as the other ship settled into a parallel course. It was Luke's X-wing, all right.

 Or at least, itlooked like Luke's X-wing. "So," he said casually, swiveling the laser cannons around to target the other. Situated the way it was, the X-wing would have to yaw 90 degrees around before it could fire at them. Unless, of course, it had been modified. "This just a social call, or what?"

 "Not really. I found an old gadget that... well, I thought Lando might be able to identify it." He hesitated. "I don't think we ought to discuss it out in the open like this. How about you?"

 "I don't think we should talk about that, either," Han told him, mind racing. It sounded like Luke, too; but after that near-disastrous decoy attempt on Bpfassh, he wasn't about to take anything for granted. Somehow, they needed to make a positive identification, and fast.

 He tapped a switch, cutting himself out of the radio circuit. "Leia, can you tell whether or not that's really Luke out there?"

 "I think so," she said slowly. "I'm almost positive it is."

 " 'Almost positive' won't cut it, sweetheart," he warned her.

 "I know," she said. "Hang on; I've got an idea."

 Han cut himself back into the radio circuit. "said that if I had a slave circuit they could get me in a lot faster," Luke was saying. "A hyperspace jump as close to Nkllon as the gravity well will permit, and then just a few minutes of cover before I'd be in the planetary umbra and could go the rest of the way in on my own."

 "Except that X-wings don't come equipped with slave circuits?" Han suggested.

 "Right," Luke said, a little dryly. "Some oversight in the design phase, no doubt."

 "No doubt," Han echoed, beginning to sweat a little. Whatever Leia was up to, he wished she'd get to it.

 "Actually, I'm glad you don't have one," Leia spoke up. "It feels safer traveling in convoy this way. Oh, before I forget, there's someone here who wants to say hello."

 "Artoo?" Threepio's prissy voice said tentatively. "Are you there?"

 Han's headphone erupted with a blather of electronic beeps and twitters. "Well, I don'tknow where else you might have been," Threepio said stiffly. "From past experience, there are a considerable variety of difficulties you could have gotten yourself into. Certainly without me along to smooth things out for you."

 The headphone made a noise that sounded suspiciously like an electronic snort. "Yes, well, you'vealways believed that," Threepio countered, even more stiffly. "I suppose you're entitled to your delusions."

 Artoo snorted again; and, smiling tightly to himself, Han keyed off his control board and dropped the lasers back into standby status. He'd known a lot of men, back in his smuggling days, who wouldn't have wanted a wife who could sometimes think faster than they could.

 Speaking for himself, Han had long ago decided he wouldn't have it any other way.

 

 The shieldship pilot hadn't been exaggerating. It was nearly ten hours later when he finally signaled that they were on their own, made one final not-quite-impolite comment, and pulled off to the side, out of the way.

 There wasn't much to see; but then, Han decided, the dark side of an undeveloped planet was seldom very scenic. A homing signal winked at him from one of the scopes, and he made a leisurely turn in the indicated direction.

 From behind him came the sound of a footstep. "What's happening?" Leia asked, yawning as she sat down in the copilot's seat.

 "We're in Nkllon's shadow," Han told her, nodding toward the starless mass directly ahead of them. "I've got a lock on Lando's mining operationlooks like we'll be there in ten or fifteen minutes."

 "Okay." Leia looked off to the side, at the running lights of the X-wing pacing them. "Have you talked with Luke lately?"

 "Not for a couple of hours. He said he was going to try and get some sleep. I think Artoo's running the ship at the moment."

 "Yes, he is," Leia nodded, with that slightly absent voice she always used when practicing her new Jedi skills. "Luke's not sleeping very well, though. Something's bothering him."

 "Something's been bothering him for the past couple of months," Han reminded her. "He'll get over it."

 "No, this is something different," Leia shook her head. "Something moreI don't know; moreurgent , somehow." She turned back to face him. "Winter thought that maybe he'd be willing to talk to you about it."

 "Well, he hasn't yet," Han said. "Look, don't worry. When he's ready to talk, he'll talk."

 "I suppose so." She peered out of the cockpit at the edge of the planetary mass they were speeding toward. "Incredible. Do you realize you can actually see part of the solar corona from here?"

 "Yeah, well, don't ask me to take you out for a closer look," Han told her. "Those shieldships aren't just for show, you knowthe sunlight out there is strong enough to fry every sensor we have in a few seconds and take theFalcon 's hull off a couple of minutes later."

 She shook her head wonderingly. "First Bespin, now Nkllon. Have you ever known Lando when hewasn't involved in some kind of crazy scheme?"

 "Not very often," Han had to admit. "Though at Bespin, at least, he had a known technology to work withCloud City had been running for years before he got hold of it. This" he nodded out the viewport "they had to think up pretty much from scratch."

 Leia leaned forward. "I think I see the citythat group of lights over there."

 Han looked where she was pointing. "Too small," he said. "More likely it's an outrider group of mole miners. Last I heard he had just over a hundred of the things digging stuff out of the surface."

 "Those are, what, those asteroid ships we helped him get from Stonehill Industries?"

 "No, he's using those in the outer system for tug work," Han corrected. "These are little two-man jobs that look like cones with the points chopped off. They've got a set of plasma-jet drills pointing down around the underside hatchyou just land where you want to drill, fire the jets for a minute or two to chop up the ground, then go on down through the hatch and pick up the pieces."

 "Oh, right, I remember those now," Leia nodded. "They were originally asteroid miners, too, weren't they?"

 "The style was. Lando found this particular batch being used in a smelting complex somewhere. Instead of just removing the plasma jets, the owners had hauled the things up whole and wedged them into place on the line."

 "I wonder how Lando got hold of them."

 "We probably don't want to know."

 The transmitter crackled. "Unidentified ships, this is Nomad City Control," a crisp voice said. "You've been cleared for landing on Platforms Five and Six. Follow the beacon in, and watch out for the bumps."

 "Got it," Han said. TheFalcon was skimming the ground now, the altimeter reading them as just under fifty meters up. Ahead, a low ridge rose to meet them; giving the controls a tap, Han nudged them over it

 And there, directly ahead, was Nomad City.

 "Tell me again," he invited Leia, "about Lando and crazy schemes?"

 She shook her head wordlessly... and even Han, who'd more or less known what to expect, had to admit the view was stunning. Huge, humpbacked, blazing with thousands of lights in the darkside gloom, the mining complex looked like some sort of exotic monstrous living creature as it lumbered its way across the terrain, dwarfing the low ridges over which it walked. Searchlights crisscrossed the area in front of it; a handful of tiny ships buzzed like insect parasites around its back or scuttered across the ground in front of its feet.

 It took Han's brain a handful of seconds to resolve the monster into its component parts: the old Dreadnaught Cruiser on top, the forty captured Imperial AT-ATs underneath carrying it across the ground, the shuttles and pilot vehicles moving around and in front of it.

 Somehow, knowing what it was didn't make it the least bit less impressive.

 The transmitter crackled again. "Unidentified ship," a familiar voice said, "welcome to Nomad City. What's this about playing a hand of sabacc?"

 Han grinned lopsidedly. "Hello, Lando. We were just talking about you."

 "I'll bet," Lando said wryly. "Probably remarking on my business skills and creativity."

 "Something like that," Han told him. "Any special trick involved in landing on that thing?"

 "Not really," the other assured them. "We're only going a few kilometers an hour, after all. Is that Luke in the X-wing?"

 "Yes, I'm here," Luke put in before Han could answer. "This place is amazing, Lando."

 "Wait till you see it from the inside. It's about time you people came to visit, I might add. Are Leia and Chewie with you?"

 "We're all here," Leia said.

 "It's not exactly a social call," Han warned him. "We need a little help."

 "Well, sure," Lando said, with just the slightest bit of hesitation. "Anything I can do. Look, I'm in Project Central at the moment, supervising a difficult dig. I'll have someone meet you on the landing platform and bring you down here. Don't forget there's no air heremake sure you wait for the docking tube to connect before you try popping the hatch."

 "Right," Han said. "Make sure your reception committee is someone you can trust."

 Another slight pause. "Oh?" Lando asked, casually. "Is there something?"

 He was cut off by a sudden electronic squeal from the transmitter. "What's that?" Leia snapped.

 "Someone's jamming us," Han growled, jabbing at the transmitter cutoff. The squealing vanished, leaving an unpleasant ringing in his ears as he keyed for intercom. "Chewie, we've got trouble," he called. "Get up here."

 He got an acknowledgment, turned back to the transmitter. "Get us a scan of the area," he told Leia. "See if there's anything coming in."

 "Right," Leia said, already working the keys. "What are you going to do?"

 "I'm going to find us a clear frequency." He pulled theFalcon out of its approach vector, made sure they had an open field around them, then turned the transmitter back on, keeping the volume low. There were freq-scanning and mixing tricks that he'd used in the past against this kind of jamming. The question now was whether he was going to have the time to implement them.

 Abruptly, much quicker than he'd expected, the squeal dissolved into a voice. "peating: any ships who can read me, please check in."

 "Lando, it's me," Han called. "What's going on?"

 "I'm not sure," Lando said, sounding distracted. "It could be just a solar flare scrambling our communicationsthat happens sometimes. But the pattern here doesn't seem quite right for..."

 His voice trailed off. "What?" Han demanded.

 There was a faint hiss from the speaker, the sound of someone inhaling deeply. "Imperial Star Destroyer," Lando said quietly. "Coming in fast toward the planetary shadow."

 Han looked at Leia, saw her face turn to stone as she looked back at him. "They've found us," she whispered.

 

 Chapter 13

 "I see it, Artoo, I see it," Luke soothed. "Let me worry about the Star Destroyer; you just keep trying to find a way through that jamming."

 The little droid warbled a nervous-sounding acknowledgment and got back to work. Ahead, theMillennium Falcon had pulled out of its landing approach and was swinging back on what looked like an intercept course for the approaching ship. Hoping Han knew what he was doing, Luke keyed the X-wing for attack status and followed.Leia? he called silently.

 Her response contained no words; but the anger and frustration and quiet fear came through all too clearly.Hang on, I'm with you, he told her, putting as much reassurance and confidence into the thought as he could.

 A confidence which, he had to admit, he didn't particularly feel. The Star Destroyer itself didn't worry himif Lando's descriptions of the sunlight's intensity were right, the big ship itself was probably helpless by now, its sensors and maybe even a fair amount of its armament vaporized right off its hull.

 But the TIE fighters protected in its hangars weren't so handicapped... and as soon as the ship reached Nkllon's shadow, those fighters would be free to launch.

 Abruptly, the static cleared. "Luke?"

 "I'm here," Luke confirmed. "What's the plan?"

 "I was hopingyou'd have one," the other said dryly. "Looks like we're a little outnumbered here."

 "Does Lando have any fighters?"

 "He's scrambling what he's got, but he's going to keep them close in to protect the complex. I get the feeling the crews aren't all that experienced."

 "Looks like we're the attack front, then," Luke said. A stray memory flicked through his mind: walking into Jabba's palace on Tatooine five years ago, using the Force to befuddle the Gamorrean guards. "Let's try this," he told Han. "I'll run ahead of you, try to confuse or slow down their reflexes as much as I can. You follow right behind me and take them out."

 "Sounds as good as we're going to get," Han grunted. "Stay close to the ground; with luck, we'll be able to run some of them into those low ridges."

 "But don't gettoo low," Leia warned. "Remember that you're not going to be able to concentrate very much on your flying."

 "I can handle both," Luke assured her, giving the instruments one last scan. His first space combat as a full Jedi. Distantly, he wondered if this was how the Jedi of the Old Republic had handled such battles. Or even if they'd fought like this at all.

 "Here they come," Han announced. "Out of the hangar and on their way. Looks like... probably only one squadron. Overconfident."

 "Maybe." Luke frowned at his tactical scope. "What are those other ships with them?"

 "I don't know," Han said slowly. "They're pretty big, though. Could be troop carriers."

 "Let's hope not." If this was a full-scale invasion, and not just another hit-and-fade like at Bpfassh... "You'd better warn Lando."

 "Leia's on it. You ready?"

 Luke took a deep breath. The TIE fighters had formed into three four-ship groups now, sweeping directly toward them. "I'm ready," he said.

 "Okay. Let's do it."

 The first group was coming in fast. Half closing his eyes, flying entirely on reflex, Luke reached out with the Force.

 It was a strange sensation. Strange, and more than a little unpleasant. To touch another mind with the intent of communication was one thing; to touch that same mind with the intent of deliberately distorting its perception was something else entirely.

 He'd had a similar feeling at Jabba's, with those guards, but had put it down then to nervousness about his mission to rescue Han. Now, he realized that there was more to it than that. Perhaps this sort of actioneven done purely in self-defensewas dangerously close to the edge of the dark areas where Jedi were forbidden to go.

 He wondered why neither Yoda nor Ben had ever told him about this. Wondered what else there was about being a Jedi that he was going to have to discover on his own.

 Luke?

 Dimly, he felt himself being jammed into his straps as he twitched the X-wing to one side. The voice whispering into his mind... "Ben?" he called aloud. It didn't sound like Ben Kenobi; but if it wasn't him, then who?

 You will come to me, Luke,the voice said again.You mustcome to me. I will await you.

 Who are you?Luke asked, focusing as much of his strength on the contact as he could without risking a crash. But the other mind was too elusive to track, skittering away like a bubble in a hurricane.Where are you?

 You will find me.Even as Luke strained, he could feel the contact slipping away.You will find me... and the Jedi shall rise again. Until then, farewell.

 Wait!But the call was fading into nothingness. Clenching his teeth, Luke strained... and gradually began to realize that another, more familiar voice was calling his name. "Leia?" he croaked back through a mouth that was inexplicably dry.

 "Luke, are you all right?" Leia asked anxiously.

 "Sure," he said. His voice sounded better this time. "I'm fine. What's wrong?"

 "You'rewhat's wrong," Han cut in. "You planning to chase them all the way home?"

 Luke blinked, looking around in surprise. The buzzing TIE fighters were gone, leaving nothing but bits of wreckage strewn across the landscape. On his scope, he could see that the Star Destroyer had left Nkllon's shadow again, driving hard away from the planet toward a point far enough out of the gravity well for a lightspeed jump. Beyond it, a pair of miniature suns were approaching: two of Lando's shieldships, belatedly arrivingnow that it was too lateto assist in the fight. "It's all over?" he asked stupidly.

 "It's all over," Leia assured him. "We got two of the TIE fighters before the rest disengaged and retreated."

 "What about the troop carriers?"

 "They went back with the fighters," Han said. "We still don't know what they were doing herewe sort of lost track of them during the fight. Didn't look like they ever went very close to the city itself, though."

 Luke took a deep breath, glanced at the X-wing's chrono. In and among all of that, he'd somehow lost over half an hour. Half an hour that his internal time sense had no recollection of whatsoever. Could that strange Jedi contact really have lasted that long?

 It was something he would have to look into. Very carefully.

 

 On the main bridge screen, showing as little more than a bright spot against Nkllon's dark backdrop, theJudicator made its jump to lightspeed. "They're clear, Admiral," Pellaeon announced, looking over at Thrawn.

 "Good." The Grand Admiral gave the other displays an almost lazy examination, though there was little to worry about this far out in the Athega system. "So," he said, swiveling his chair around. "Master C'baoth?"

 "They fulfilled their mission," C'baoth said, that strangely taut expression on his face again. "They obtained fifty-one of the mole miner machines you sent them for."

 "Fifty-one," Thrawn repeated with obvious satisfaction. "Excellent. You had no problem guiding them in and out?"

 C'baoth focused his eyes on Thrawn. "They fulfilled their mission," he repeated. "How many times do you intend to ask me the same question?"

 "Until I'm sure I have the correct answer," Thrawn replied coolly. "For a while there your face looked as if you were having trouble."

 "I had no trouble, Grand Admiral Thrawn," C'baoth said loftily. "What I had was conversation." He paused, a slight smile on his face. "With Luke Skywalker."

 "What are you talking about?" Pellaeon snorted. "Current intelligence reports indicate that Skywalker is"

 He broke off at a gesture from Thrawn. "Explain," the Grand Admiral said.

 C'baoth nodded toward the display. "He's there right now, Grand Admiral Thrawn. He arrived on Nkllon just ahead of theJudicator ."

 Thrawn's glowing red eyes narrowed. "Skywalker is on Nkllon?" he asked, his voice dangerously quiet.

 "In the very center of the battle," C'baoth told him, very clearly enjoying the Grand Admiral's discomfiture.

 "And you said nothing to me?" Thrawn demanded in that same deadly voice.

 C'baoth's smile vanished. "I told you before, Grand Admiral Thrawn: you will leave Skywalker alone.I will deal with himin my own time, in my own way. All I require of you is the fulfillment of your promise to take me to Jomark."

 For a long moment Thrawn gazed at the Jedi Master, his eyes glowing red slits, his face hard and totally unreadable. Pellaeon held his breath... "It's too soon," the Grand Admiral said at last.

 C'baoth snorted. "Why? Because you find my talents too useful to give up?"

 "Not at all," Thrawn said, his voice icy. "It's a simple matter of efficiency. The rumors of your presence haven't had enough time to spread. Until we can be sure Skywalker will respond, you'll just be wasting your time there."

 A strangely dreamy look seeped onto C'baoth's face. "Oh, he'll respond," he said softly. "Trust me, Grand Admiral Thrawn. Hewill respond."

 "I always trust you," Thrawn said sardonically. He reached a hand up to stroke the ysalamir draped over his command chair, as if to remind the Jedi Master just how far he trusted him. "At any rate, I suppose it's your own time to waste. Captain Pellaeon, how long will it take to repair the damage to theJudicator ?"

 "Several days at the least, Admiral," Pellaeon told him. "Depending on the damage, it could take as long as three or four weeks."

 "All right. We'll go to the rendezvous point, stay with them long enough to make sure repairs are properly underway, and then take Master C'baoth to Jomark. I trust that will be satisfactory?" he added, looking back at C'baoth.

 "Yes." Carefully, C'baoth unfolded himself from his chair and stood up. "I will rest now, Grand Admiral Thrawn. Alert me if you need my assistance."

 "Certainly."

 Thrawn watched the other wend his way back across the bridge; and as the doors slid solidly shut behind him, the Grand Admiral turned to Pellaeon. Pellaeon braced himself, trying not to wince. "I want a course projection, Captain," Thrawn said, his voice cold but steady. "The most direct line from Nkllon to Jomark, at the best speed a hyperdrive-equipped X-wing could take it."

 "Yes, Admiral." Pellaeon signaled to the navigator, who nodded and got busy. "You think he's right about Skywalker going there?"

 Thrawn shrugged fractionally. "The Jedi had ways of influencing people, Captain, even over considerable distances. It's possible that even out here he was close enough to Skywalker to plant a suggestion or compulsion. Whether those techniques will work on another Jedi" He shrugged again. "We'll see."

 "Yes, sir." The numbers were starting to track across Pellaeon's display now. "Well, even if Skywalker leaves Nkllon immediately, there won't be any problem getting C'baoth to Jomark ahead of him."

 "I knew that much already, Captain," Thrawn said. "What I need is a bit more challenging. We're going to drop C'baoth off on Jomark, then backtrack to a point on Skywalker's projected course. A point at least twenty light-years away, I think."

 Pellaeon frowned at him. The expression on Thrawn's face made the back of his neck tingle... "I don't understand, sir," he said carefully.

 The glowing eyes regarded him thoughtfully. "It's quite simple, Captain. I mean to disabuse our great and glorious Jedi Master of his growing belief that he's indispensable to us."

 Pellaeon got it then. "So we wait along Skywalker's projected approach to Jomark and ambush him?"

 "Precisely," Thrawn nodded. "At which point we decide whether to capture him for C'baoth" his eyes hardened "or simply kill him."

 Pellaeon stared at him, feeling his jaw drop. "You promised C'baoth he could have him."

 "I'm reconsidering the deal," Thrawn told him coolly. "Skywalker has proved himself to be highly dangerous, and by all accounts has already withstood at least one attempt to turn him. C'baoth should have more success bending Skywalker's sister and her twins to his will."

 Pellaeon glanced behind him at the closed doors, reminding himself firmly that there was no way for C'baoth to eavesdrop on their conversation with all the ysalamiri scattered around theChimera 's bridge. "Perhaps he's looking forward to the challenge, sir," he suggested cautiously.

 "There will be many challenges for him to face before the Empire is reestablished. Let him save his talents and cunning for those." Thrawn turned back to his monitors. "At any rate, he'll likely forget all about Skywalker once he has the sister. I expect our Jedi Master's wants and desires will prove to be as erratic as his moods."

 Pellaeon thought back. On the matter of Skywalker, at least, C'baoth's desire seemed to have remained remarkably steady. "I respectfully suggest, Admiral, that we still make every possible effort to take Skywalker alive." He had a flash of inspiration "Particularly since his death might induce C'baoth to leave Jomark and return to Wayland."

 Thrawn looked back at him, glowing eyes narrowed. "Interesting point, Captain," he murmured softly. "Interesting point, indeed. You're right, of course. By all means, we must keep him off Wayland. At least until the work on the Spaarti cylinders is finished and we have all the ysalamiri there we're going to need." He smiled tightly. "His reaction to what we're doing there might not be at all pleasant."

 "Agreed, sir," Pellaeon said.

 Thrawn's lip twitched. "Very well, Captain: I accede to your suggestion." He straightened himself in his seat. "It's time to be going. Prepare theChimaera for lightspeed."

 Pellaeon turned back to his displays. "Yes, sir. Direct route to the rendezvous point?"

 "We'll be making a short detour first. I want you to swing us around the system to the commercial out-vector near the shieldship depot and drop some probes to watch for Skywalker's departure. Near-system and farther out." He looked out the viewport in Nkllon's direction. "And who knows? Where Skywalker goes, theMillennium Falcon often goes, as well."

 "And then we'll have them all."

 

 Chapter 14

 "Fifty-one," Lando Calrissian growled, throwing a glare at Han and Leia as he paced a convoluted path around the low chairs in the lounge. "Fifty-one of my best reconditioned mole miners.Fifty-one. That's almost half my work force. You realize that?half my work force."

 He dropped down into a chair, but was on his feet again almost immediately, stalking around the room, his black cloak billowing behind him like a tame storm cloud. Leia opened her mouth to offer commiseration, felt Han squeeze her hand warningly. Obviously, Han had seen Lando in this state before. Swallowing back the words, she watched as he continued his caged-animal pacing.

 And without obvious warning, it was over. "I'm sorry," he said abruptly, coming to a halt in front of Leia and taking her hand. "I'm neglecting my duties as host, aren't I? Welcome to Nkllon." He raised her hand, kissed it, and waved his free hand toward the lounge window. "So. What do you think of my little enterprise?"

 "Impressive," Leia said, and meant it. "How did you ever come up with the idea for this place?"

 "Oh, it's been kicking around for years," he shrugged, pulling her gently to her feet and guiding her over to the window, his hand resting against the small of her back. Ever since she and Han had gotten married, Leia had noticed a resurgence of this kind of courtly behavior toward her from Landobehavior that harkened back to their first meeting at Cloud City. She'd puzzled over that for a while, until she'd noticed that all the attention seemed to annoy Han.

 Or, at least, it normally annoyed him. Right now, he didn't even seem to notice.

 "I found plans for something similar once in the Cloud City files, dating back to when Lord Ecclessis Figg first built the place," Lando continued, waving a hand toward the window. The horizon rolled gently as the city walked, the motion and view reminding Leia of her handful of experiences aboard sailing ships. "Most of the metal they used came from the hot inner planet, Miser, and even with Ugnaughts doing the mining they had a devil of a time with it. Figg sketched out an idea for a rolling mining center that could stay permanently out of direct sunlight on Miser's dark side. But nothing ever came of it."

 "It wasn't practical," Han said, coming up behind Leia. "Miser's terrain was too rough for something on wheels to get across easily."

 Lando looked at him in surprise. "How do you know about that?"

 Han shook his head distractedly, his eyes searching the landscape and the starry sky above it. "I spent an afternoon going through the Imperial files once, back when you were trying to talk Mon Mothma into helping fund this place. Wanted to make sure someone else hadn't already tried it and found out it didn't work."

 "Nice of you to go to that kind of trouble." Lando cocked an eyebrow. "So, what's going on?"

 "We should probably wait until Luke gets here to talk about it," Leia suggested quietly before Han could answer.

 Lando glanced past Han, as if only just noticing Luke's absence. "Where is he, anyway?"

 "He wanted to catch a fast shower and change," Han told him, shifting his attention to a small ore shuttle coming in for a landing. "Those X-wings don't have much in the way of comfort."

 "Especially over long trips," Lando agreed, tracing Han's gaze with his eyes. "I've always thought putting a hyperdrive on something that small was a poor idea."

 "I'd better see what's keeping him," Han decided suddenly. "You have a comm in this room?"

 "It's over there," Lando said, pointing toward a curved wooden bar at one end of the lounge. "Key for central; they'll track him down for you."

 "Thanks," Han called over his shoulder, already halfway there.

 "It's bad, isn't it?" Lando murmured to Leia, his eyes following Han across the room.

 "Bad enough," she admitted. "There's a chance that that Star Destroyer came here looking for me."

 For a moment, Lando was silent. "You came here for help." It wasn't a question.

 "Yes."

 He took a deep breath. "Well... I'll do what I can, of course."

 "Thank you," Leia said.

 "Sure," he said. But his eyes drifted from Han to the window and the activity beyond it, his expression hardening as he did so. Perhaps he was thinking of the last time Han and Leia had come to him for help.

 And what giving that help had cost him.

 

 Lando listened to the whole story in silence, then shook his head. "No," he said positively. "If there was a leak, it didn't come from Nkllon."

 "How can you be sure of that?" Leia asked.

 "Because there's been no bounty offered for you," Lando told her. "We have our fair share of shady people here, but they're all out for profit. None of them would turn you over to the Empire just for the fun of it. Besides, why would the Imperials steal my mole miners if they were after you?"

 "Harassment, maybe," Han suggested. "I mean, why steal mole miners anyway?"

 "You got me," Lando conceded. "Maybe they're trying to put economic pressure on one of my clients, or maybe they just want to disrupt the New Republic's flow of raw materials generally. Anyway, that's beside the point. The point is that they took the mole miners, and they didn't take you."

 "How do you know there's been no bounty offer?" Luke asked from his seat off to the righta seat, Leia had already noted, where he and his lightsaber would be between his friends and the room's only door. Apparently, he didn't feel any safer here than she did.

 "Because I'd have heard about it," Lando said, sounding a little miffed. "Just because I'm respectable doesn't mean I'm out of touch."

 "I told you he'd have contacts," Han said with a grimly satisfied nod. "Great. So which of these contacts do you trust, Lando?"

 "Well" Lando broke off as a beep came from his wrist. "Excuse me," he said, sliding a compact comlink from the decorative wristband and flicking it on. "Yes?"

 A voice said something, inaudible from where Leia was sitting. "What kind of transmitter?" Lando asked, frowning. The voice said something else. "All right, I'll take care of it. Continue scanning."

 He closed down the comlink and replaced it in his wristband. "That was my communications section," he said, looking around the room. "They've picked up a short-range transmitter on a very unusual frequency... which appears to be sending from this lounge."

 Beside her, Leia felt Han stiffen. "What kind of transmitter?" he demanded.

 "This kind, probably," Luke said. Standing up, he pulled a flattened cylinder from his tunic and stepped over to Lando. "I thought you might be able to identify it for me."

 Lando took the cylinder, hefted it. "Interesting," he commented, peering closely at the alien script on its surface. "I haven't seen one of these in years. Not this style, anyway. Where'd you get it?"

 "It was buried in mud in the middle of a swamp. Artoo was able to pick it up from pretty far away, but he couldn't tell me what it was."

 "That's our transmitter, all right," Lando nodded. "Amazing that it's still running."

 "What exactly is it transmitting?" Han asked, eyeing the device as if it were a dangerous snake.

 "Just a carrier signal," Lando assured him. "And the range is smallwell under a planetary radius. Nobody used it to follow Luke here, if that's what you were wondering."

 "Do you know what it is?" Luke asked.

 "Sure," Lando said, handing it back. "It's an old beckon call. Pre-Clone Wars vintage, from the looks of it."

 "A beckon call?" Luke frowned, cupping it in his hand. "You mean like a ship's remote?"

 "Right," Lando nodded. "Only a lot more sophisticated. If you had a ship with a full-rig slave system you could tap in a single command on the call and the ship would come straight to you, automatically maneuvering around any obstacles along the way. Some of them would even fight their way through opposing ships, if necessary, with a reasonable degree of skill." He shook his head in memory. "Which could be extremely useful at times."

 Han snorted under his breath. "Tell that to theKatana fleet."

 "Well, of course you have to build in some safeguards," Lando countered. "But to simply decentralize important ship's functions into dozens or hundreds of droids just creates its own set of problems. The limited jump-slave circuits we use here between transports and shieldships are certainly safe enough."

 "Did you use jump-slave circuits on Cloud City, too?" Luke asked. "Artoo said he saw you with one of these right after we got out of there."

 "My personal ship was full-rigged," Lando said. "I wanted something I could get at a moment's warning, just in case." His lip twitched. "Vader's people must have found it and shut it down while they were waiting for you, because it sure didn't come when I called it. You say you found it in aswamp ?"

 "Yes." Luke looked at Leia. "On Dagobah."

 Leia stared at him. "Dagobah?" she asked. "As in the planet that Dark Jedi from Bpfassh fled to?"

 Luke nodded. "That's the place." He fingered the beckon call, an odd expression on his face. "This must have been his."

 "It could just as easily have been lost some other time by someone else," Lando pointed out. "Pre-Clone Wars calls could run for a century or more on standby."

 "No," Luke said, shaking his head slowly. "It was his, all right. The cave where I found it absolutely tingles with the dark side. I think it must have been the place where he died."

 For a long moment they all sat in silence. Leia studied her brother closely, sensing the new tension lying just beneath the surface of his thoughts. Something else, besides the beckon call, must have happened to him on Dagobah. Something that tied in with the new sense of urgency she'd felt on the way in toward Nkllon...

 Luke looked up sharply, as if sensing the flow of Leia's thoughts. "We were talking about Lando's smuggler contacts," he said. The message was clear: this was not the time to ask him about it.

 "Right," Han said quickly. Apparently, he'd gotten the hint, too. "I need to know which of your marginally legal friends you can trust."

 The other shrugged. "Depends on what you need to trust them with."

 Han looked him straight in the eye. "Leia's life."

 Seated on Han's other side, Chewbacca growled something that sounded startled. Lando's mouth fell open, just slightly. "You're not serious."

 Han nodded, his eyes still locked on Lando's face. "You saw how close the Imperials are breathing down our necks. We need a place to hide her until Ackbar can find out how they're getting their information. She needs to stay in touch with what's happening on Coruscant, which means a diplomatic station we can quietly tap into."

 "And a diplomatic station means encrypt codes," Lando said heavily. "And quietly tapping into encrypt codes means finding a slicer."

 "A slicer you can trust."

 Lando hissed softly between his teeth and slowly shook his head. "I'm sorry, Han, but I don't know any slicers I trust that far."

 "Do you know any smuggler groups that have one or two on retainer?" Han persisted.

 "That I trust?" Lando pondered. "Not really. The only one who might even come close is a smuggler chief named Talon Karrdeeveryone I've talked to says he's extremely honest in his trade dealings."

 "Have you ever met him?" Luke asked.

 "Once," Lando said. "He struck me as a pretty cold fish calculating and highly mercenary."

 "I've heard of Karrde," Han said. "Been trying for months to contact him, in fact. Dravisyou remember Dravis?he told me Karrde's group was probably the biggest one around these days."

 "Could be," Lando shrugged. "Unlike Jabba, Karrde doesn't go around flaunting his power and influence. I'm not even sure where his base is, let alone what his loyalties are."

 "If hehas any loyalties," Han grunted; and in his eyes Leia could see the echoes of all those fruitless contacts with smuggling groups who preferred to sit on the political fence. "A lot of them out there don't."

 "It's an occupational hazard." Lando rubbed his chin, forehead wrinkled in thought. "I don't know, Han. I'd offer to put the two of you up here, but we just don't have the defenses to stop a really serious attack." He frowned into the distance. "Unless... we do something clever."

 "Such as?"

 "Such as taking a shuttle or living module and burying it underground," Lando said, a gleam coming into his eye. "We put it right by the dawn line, and within a few hours you'd be under direct sunlight. The Imperials wouldn't even be able to find you there, let alone get to you."

 Han shook his head. "Too risky. If we ran into any problems, there also wouldn't be any way for anyone to get help to us." Chewbacca pawed at his arm, grunting softly, and Han turned to face the Wookiee.

 "It wouldn't be as risky as it looks," Lando said, shifting his attention to Leia. "We should be able to make the capsule itself foolproofwe've done similar things with delicate survey instrument packs without damaging them."

 "How long is Nkllon's rotation?" Leia asked. Chewbacca's grunting was getting insistent, but it still wasn't loud enough for her to make out what the discussion was all about.

 "Just over ninety standard days," Lando told her.

 "Which means we'd be completely out of touch with Coruscant for a minimum of forty-five. Unless you've got a transmitter that would operate on the sunside."

 Lando shook his head. "The best we've got would be fried in minutes."

 "In that case, I'm afraid"

 She broke off as, beside her, Han cleared his throat. "Chewie has a suggestion," he said, his face and voice a study in mixed feelings.

 They all looked at him. "Well?" Leia prompted.

 Han's lip twitched. "He says that if you want, he's willing to take you to Kashyyyk."

 Leia looked past him to Chewbacca, a strange and not entirely pleasant thrill running through her. "I was under the impression," she said carefully, "that Wookiees discouraged human visitors to their world."

 Chewbacca's reply was as mixed as Han's expression. Mixed, but solidly confident. "The Wookiees were friendly enough to humans before the Empire came in and started enslaving them," Han said. "Anyway, it ought to be possible to keep the visit pretty quiet: you, Chewie, the New Republic rep, and a couple of others."

 "Except that we're back to the New Republic rep knowing about me," Leia pointed out.

 "Yes, but he'll be a Wookiee," Lando pointed out. "If he accepts you under his personal protection, he won't betray you. Period."

 Leia studied Han's face. "Sounds good. So tell me why you don't like it."

 A muscle in Han's cheek twitched. "Kashyyyk isn't exactly the safest place in the galaxy," he said bluntly. "Especially for non-Wookiees. You'll be living in trees, hundreds of meters above the ground"

 "I'll be with Chewie," she reminded him firmly, suppressing a shiver. She'd heard stories about Kashyyyk's lethal ecology, too. "You've trusted your own life to him often enough."

 He shrugged uncomfortably. "This is different."

 "Why don't you go with them?" Luke suggested. "Then she'll be doubly protected."

 "Right," Han said sourly. "I was planning to; except that Chewie thinks it'll gain us more time if Leia and I split up. He takes her to Kashyyyk; I fly around in theFalcon , pretending she's still with me. Somehow."

 Lando nodded. "Makes sense to me."

 Leia looked at Luke, the obvious suggestion coming to her lips... and dying there unsaid. Something in his face warned her not to ask him to come with them. "Chewie and I will be fine," she said, squeezing Han's hand. "Don't worry."

 "I guess that's settled, then," Lando said. "You can use my ship, of course, Chewie. In fact" he looked thoughtful "if you want company, Han, maybe I'll come along with you."

 Han shrugged, clearly still unhappy with the arrangement. "If you want to, sure."

 "Good," Lando said. "We should probably fly out of Nkllon togetherI've been planning an offworld purchasing trip for a couple of weeks now, so I've got an excuse to leave. Once we're past the shieldship depot, Chewie and Leia can take my ship and no one'll be the wiser."

 "And then Han sends some messages to Coruscant pretending Leia's aboard?" Luke asked.

 Lando smiled slyly. "Actually, I think we can do a little bit better than that. You still have Threepio with you?"

 "He's helping Artoo run a damage check on theFalcon ," Leia told him. "Why?"

 "You'll see," Lando said, getting to his feet. "This'll take a little time, but I think it'll be worth it. Come onlet's go talk to my chief programmer."

 

 The chief programmer was a little man with dreamy blue eyes, a thin swath of hair arcing like a gray rainbow from just over his eyebrows to the nape of his neck, and a shiny borg implant wrapped around the back of his head. Luke listened as Lando outlined the procedure and watched long enough to make sure it was all going smoothly. Then, quietly, he slipped out, returning to the quarters Lando's people had assigned him.

 He was still there an hour later, poring uselessly over what seemed to be an endless stream of star charts, when Leia found him.

 "There you are," she said, coming in and glancing at the charts on his display. "We were starting to wonder where you went."

 "I had some things to check on," Luke said. "You finished already?"

 "My part is," Leia said, pulling a chair over to him and sitting down. "They're working on tailoring the program now. After that it'll be Threepio's turn."

 Luke shook his head. "Seems to me the whole thing ought to be simpler than all that."

 "Oh, the basic technique is," Leia agreed. "Apparently, the hard part is slipping it past the relevant part of Threepio's watchdog programming without changing his personality in the process." She looked again at the screen. "I was going to ask you if you'd be interested in coming to Kashyyyk with me," she said, her voice trying hard to be casual. "But it looks like you've got somewhere else to go."

 Luke winced. "I'm not running out on you, Leia," he insisted, wishing he could truly believe that. "Really I'm not. This is something that in the long run could mean more for you and the twins than anything I could do on Kashyyyk."

 "All right," she said, calmly accepting the statement. "Can you at least tell me where you're going?"

 "I don't know yet," he confessed. "There's someone out there I have to find, but I'm not sure yet even where to start looking." He hesitated, suddenly aware of how strange and maybe even crazy this was going to sound. But he was going to have to tell them eventually. "He's another Jedi."

 She stared at him. "You're not serious."

 "Why not?" Luke asked, frowning at her. Her reaction seemed vaguely wrong, somehow. "It's a big galaxy, you know."

 "A galaxy in which you were supposedly the last of the Jedi," she countered. "Isn't that what you said Yoda told you before you died?"

 "Yes," he nodded. "But I'm beginning to think he might have been mistaken."

 Her eyebrows lifted slightly. "Mistaken? A Jedi Master?"

 A memory flashed through Luke's mind: a ghostly Obi-wan, in the middle of the Dagobah swamp, trying to explain his earlier statements about Darth Vader. "Jedi sometimes say things that are misleading," he told her. "And even Jedi Masters aren't omniscient."

 He paused, gazing at his sister, wondering how much of this he should tell her. The Empire was far from defeated, and the mysterious Jedi's life might depend on his defense remaining a secret. Leia waited in silence, that concerned expression on her face...

 "You'll have to keep this to yourself," Luke said at last. "I meanreally to yourself. I don't even want you to tell Han or Lando, unless it becomes absolutely necessary. They don't have the resistance to interrogation that you do."

 Leia shuddered, but her eyes stayed clear. "I understand," she said evenly.

 "All right. Did it ever occur to you to wonder why Master Yoda was able to stay hidden from the Emperor and Vader all those years?"

 She shrugged. "I suppose I assumed they didn't know he existed."

 "Yes, but they should have," Luke pointed out. "They knewI existed by my effect on the Force. Why not Yoda?"

 "Some kind of mental shielding?"

 "Maybe. But I think it's more likely it was because of where he chose to live. Or maybe," he amended, "where events chose for him to live."

 A faint smile brushed Leia's lips. "Is this where I finally get to find out where this secret training center of yours was?"

 "I didn't want anyone else to know," Luke said, moved by some obscure impulse to try to justify that decision to her. "He was so perfectly hiddenand even after his death I was afraid the Empire might be able to do something"

 He broke off. "Anyway, I can't see that it matters now. Yoda's home was on Dagobah. Practically next door to the dark-side cave where I found that beckon call."

 Her eyes widened in surprise, a surprise that faded into understanding. "Dagobah," she murmured, nodding slowly as if a private and long-standing problem had just been resolved. "I've always wondered how that renegade Dark Jedi was finally defeated. It must have been Yoda who..." She grimaced.

 "Who stopped him," Luke finished for her, a shiver running up his back. His own skirmishes with Darth Vader had been bad enough; a full-scale Force war between Jedi Masters would be terrifying. "And he probably didn't stop him with a lot of time to spare."

 "The beckon call was already on standby," Leia remembered. "He must have been getting ready to call his ship."

 Luke nodded. "All of which could explain why the cave was so heavy with the dark side. What itdoesn't explain is why Yoda decided to stay there."

 He paused, watching her closely; and a moment later, the understanding came. "The cave shielded him," she breathed. "Just like a pair of positive and negative electric charges close enough togetherto a distant observer they look almost like no charge at all."

 "I think that's it," Luke nodded again. "And if that's really how Master Yoda stayed hidden, there's no reason why another Jedi couldn't have pulled the same trick."

 "I'm sure another Jedi could have," Leia agreed, sounding reluctant. "But I don't think this C'baoth rumor is anywhere near solid enough to chase off after."

 Luke frowned. "What C'baoth rumor?"

 It was Leia's turn to frown. "The story that a Jedi Master named Jorus C'baoth has reemerged from wherever it was he's spent the past few decades." She stared at him. "You hadn't heard it?"

 He shook his head. "No."

 "But then, how?"

 "Someone called to me, Leia, during the battle this afternoon. In my mind. The way another Jedi would."

 For a long moment they just looked at each other. "I don't believe it," Leia said. "I just don't. Where could someone with C'baoth's power and history have hidden for so long? And why?"

 "Thewhy I don't know," Luke admitted. "As to thewhere " He nodded toward the display. "That's what I've been looking for. Someplace where a Dark Jedi might once have died." He looked at Leia again. "Do the rumors say where C'baoth is supposed to be?"

 "It could be an Imperial trap," Leia warned, her voice abruptly harsh. "The person who called to you could just as easily be a Dark Jedi like Vader, with this C'baoth rumor dangled in front of us to lure you in. Don't forget that Yoda wasn't counting themboth Vader and the Emperor were still alive when he said you were the last Jedi."

 "That's a possibility," he conceded. "It could also be just a garbled rumor. But if it's not..."

 He let the sentence hang, unfinished, in the air between them. There were deep uncertainties in Leia's face and mind, he could see, woven through by equally deep fears for his safety. But even as he watched her he could sense her gain control over both emotions. In those aspects of her training, she was making good progress. "He's on Jomark," she said at last, her voice quiet. "At least according to the rumor Wedge quoted for us."

 Luke turned to the display, called up the data on Jomark. There wasn't much there. "Not very populated," he said, glancing over the stats and the limited selection of maps. "Less than three million people, all told. Or at least back when this was compiled," he amended, searching for the publication date. "Doesn't look like anyone's taken official notice of the planet in fifteen years." He looked back at Leia. "Just the sort of place a Jedi might choose to hide from the Empire."

 "You'll be leaving right away?"

 He looked at her, swallowing the quick and obvious answer. "No, I'll wait until you and Chewie are ready to go," he said. "That way I can fly out with your shieldship. Give you that much protection, at least."

 "Thanks." Taking a deep breath, she stood up. "I hope you know what you're doing."

 "So do I," he said frankly. "But whether I do or not, it's something I have to try. That much I know for sure."

 Leia's lip twitched. "I suppose that's one of the things I'm going to have to get used to. Letting the Force move me around."

 "Don't worry about it," Luke advised her, getting to his feet and switching off the display. "It doesn't happen all at onceyou get to ease into it. Come on; let's go see how they're coming with Threepio."

 

 "At last!" Threepio cried, waving his arms in desperate relief as Luke and Leia stepped into the room. "Master Luke! Please,please tell General Calrissian that what he intends is a serious violation of my primary programming."

 "It'll be okay, Threepio," Luke soothed, stepping over to him. From the front the droid seemed to be just sitting there; it was only as Luke got closer that he could see the maze of wires snaking from both headpiece and dorsal junction box into the computer console behind him. "Lando and his people will be careful that nothing happens to you." He glanced at Lando, got a confirming nod in return.

 "But Master Luke"

 "Actually, Threepio," Lando put in, "you could think of this as really just fulfilling your primary programming in a more complete way. I mean, isn't a translation droid supposed to speak for the person he's translating for?"

 "I am primarily a protocol droid," Threepio corrected in as frosty a tone as he could probably manage. "And I say again that this isnot the sort of thing covered by any possible stretch of protocol."

 The borg looked up from the panel, nodded. "We're ready," Lando announced, touching a switch. "Give it a second... all right. Say something, Threepio."

 "Oh, dear," the droid said

 In a perfect imitation of Leia's voice.

 Artoo, standing across the room, trilled softly. "That's it," Lando said, looking decidedly pleased with himself. "The perfect decoy" he inclined his head to Leia "for the perfect lady."

 "This feels decidedly strange," Threepio continuedLeia's voice, this time, in a thoughtful mood.

 "Sounds good," Han said, looking around at the others. "We ready to go, then?"

 "Give me an hour to log some last-minute instructions," Lando said, starting toward the door. "It'll take our shieldship that long to get here, anyway."

 "We'll meet you at the ship," Han called after him, stepping over to Leia and taking her arm. "Come onwe'd better get back to theFalcon ."

 She put her hand on his, smiling reassuringly up at him. "It'll be all right, Han. Chewie and the other Wookiees will take good care of me."

 "They'd better," Han growled, glancing to where the borg was undoing the last of the cables connecting Threepio to the console. "Let's go, Threepio. I can hardly wait to hear what Chewie thinks of your new voice."

 "Oh, dear," the droid murmured again. "Oh,dear ."

 Leia shook her head in wonder as they headed for the door. "Do I really," she asked, "sound like that?"

 

 Chapter 15

 Han had fully expected that they would be attacked during the long shieldship journey out from Nkllon. For once, thankfully, his hunch was wrong. The three ships reached the shieldship depot without incident and made a short hyperspace jump together to the outer fringes of the Athega system. There, Chewbacca and Leia replaced Lando aboard his yacht-style ship, theLady Luck , and started off toward Kashyyyk. Luke waited until they were safely away before securing his X-wing back from defense posture and heading off on some mysterious errand of his own.

 Leaving Han alone on theFalcon with Lando and Threepio.

 "She'll be fine," Lando assured him, punching at the nav computer from the copilot's seat. "She's as safe now as she's ever likely to be. Don't worry."

 With an effort, Han turned from the viewport to face him. There was nothing to see out there, anywaytheLady Luck was long gone. "You know, that's almost exactly the same thing you said back on Boordii," he reminded Lando sourly. "That botched dolfrimia runremember? You said, 'It'll be fine; don't worry about it.' "

 Lando chuckled. "Yes, but this time I mean it."

 "That's nice to know. So, what do you have planned for entertainment?"

 "Well, the first thing we ought to do is have Threepio send off a message to Coruscant," Lando said. "Give the impression that Leia's aboard to any Imperials who might be listening. After that, we could move a couple of systems over and send another message. And after that" he threw Han a sideways glance "I thought we might like to do a little sightseeing."

 "Sightseeing?" Han echoed suspiciously. Lando was practically glowing with innocence, a look he almost never used except when he was trying to sucker someone into something. "You mean as in flying all over the galaxy looking for replacement mole miners?"

 "Han!" Lando protested, looking hurt now. "Are you suggesting I'd stoop so low as to try and con you into helping me run my business?"

 "Forgive me," Han said, trying not to sound too sarcastic. "I forgotyou're respectable now. So what sightsare we going to see?"

 "Well..." Casually, Lando leaned back and laced his fingers together behind his head. "You mentioned earlier that you hadn't been able to get in touch with Talon Karrde. I thought we might take another crack at it."

 Han frowned at him. "You serious?"

 "Why not? You want cargo ships, and you want a good slicer. Karrde can supply both."

 "I don't need a slicer anymore," Han said. "Leia's as safe now as she's ever likely to be. Remember?"

 "Sureuntil someone leaks the news that she's there," Lando countered. "I don't think the Wookiees would, but there are non-Wookiee traders flying in and out of Kashyyyk all the time. All it takes is one person spotting her, and you'll be right back where you were when you first got here." He cocked an eyebrow. "And Karrde might also have something on this mysterious Imperial commander who's been running you in circles lately."

 The commander who was almost certainly also the man behind the attacks on Leia... "You know how to make contact with Karrde?"

 "Not directly, but I know how to get to his people. And I thought that as long as we had Threepio and his umpteen million languages aboard anyway, we'd just go ahead and cut a new contact path."

 "That'll take time."

 "Not as much as you might think," Lando assured him. "Besides, a new path will cover our trail betteryours and mine both."

 Han grimaced, but Lando was right. And with Leia safely hidden away, at least for now, they could afford to play it cautious. "All right," he said. "Assuming we don't wind up playing tag with a Star Destroyer or two."

 "Right," Lando agreed soberly. "The last thing we want is to draw the Imperials onto Karrde's tail. We've got enough enemies out there as it is." He tapped the ship's intercom switch. "Threepio? You there?"

 "Of course," Leia's voice returned.

 "Come on up here," Lando told the droid. "Time for your debut performance."

 

 The command room was filled with sculptures instead of pictures this time: over a hundred of them, lining the walls in holographic niches as well as scattered around the floor on ornate pedestals. The variety, as Pellaeon had come to expect, was astonishing, ranging from human-style chunks of simple stone and wood to others that were more like tethered living creatures than works of art. Each was illuminated by a hazy globe of light, giving sharp contrast to the darkness of the spaces between them. "Admiral?" Pellaeon called uncertainly, trying to see around the artwork and through the gloom.

 "Come in, Captain," Thrawn's coolly modulated voice beckoned. Over at the command chair, just above the hazy white of the Grand Admiral's uniform, two glowing red slits appeared. "You have something?"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon told him, walking to the console ring and handing a data card over it. "One of our probes in the outer Athega system has picked up Skywalker.And his companions."

 "Andhis companions," Thrawn echoed thoughtfully. He took the data card, inserted it, and for a minute watched the replay in silence. "Interesting," he murmured. "Interesting, indeed. What's that third shipthe one maneuvering to link with theMillennium Falcon 's dorsal hatch?"

 "We've tentatively identified it as theLady Luck," Pellaeon said. "Administrator Lando Calrissian's personal ship. One of the other probes copied a transmission stating that Calrissian was leaving Nkllon on a purchasing trip."

 "Do we know that Calrissian did, in fact, board the ship at Nkllon?"

 "Ah... no, sir, not for certain. We can try to get that information, though."

 "Unnecessary," Thrawn said. "Our enemies are clearly past the stage of such childish tricks." Thrawn pointed to the display, where theMillennium Falcon and theLady Luck were now joined together. "Observe, Captain, their strategy. Captain Solo and his wife and probably the Wookiee Chewbacca board their ship on Nkllon, while Calrissian similarly boards his. They fly to the outer Athega system... and there they make a switch."

 Pellaeon frowned. "But we've"

 "Shh," Thrawn cut him off sharply, holding up a finger for silence, his eyes on the display. Pellaeon watched, too, as absolutely nothing happened. After a few minutes the two ships separated, maneuvering carefully away from each other.

 "Excellent," Thrawn said, freezing the frame. "Four minutes fifty-three seconds. They're in a hurry, of course, locked together so vulnerably. Which means..." His forehead furrowed in concentration, then cleared. "Three people," he said, a touch of satisfaction in his voice. "Three people transferred, in one direction or the other, between those two ships."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded, wondering how in the Empire the Grand Admiral had figuredthat one out. "At any rate, we know that Leia Organa Solo remained aboard theMillennium Falcon ."

 "Do we?" Thrawn asked, lazily polite. "Do we indeed?"

 "I believe we do, sir, yes," Pellaeon said, quietly insistent. The Grand Admiral hadn't seen the entire playback, after all. "Right after theLady Luck and Skywalker's X-wing left, we intercepted a transmission from her that definitely originated from theMillennium Falcon ."

 Thrawn shook his head. "A recording," he said, his voice leaving no room for argument. "No; they're cleverer than that. A voiceprint-doctored droid, thenprobably Skywalker's 3PO protocol droid. Leia Organa Solo, you see, was one of the two people who left with theLady Luck ."

 Pellaeon looked at the display. "I don't understand."

 "Consider the possibilities," Thrawn said, leaning back in his chair and steepling his fingertips in front of him. "Three people start out aboard theMillennium Falcon, one aboard theLady Luck . Three people then transfer. But neither Solo nor Calrissian is the type to turn his ship over to the dubious command of a computer or droid. So each ship must end up with at least one person aboard. You follow so far?"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said. "That doesn't tell us who is where, though."

 "Patience, Captain," Thrawn interrupted him. "Patience. As you say, the question now is that of the final makeup of the crews. Fortunately, once we know there were three transfers, there are only two possible combinations. Either Solo and Organa Solo are together aboard theLady Luck , or else Organa Solo and the Wookiee are there."

 "Unless one of the transfers was a droid," Pellaeon pointed out.

 "Unlikely," Thrawn shook his head. "Historically, Solo has never liked droids, nor allowed them to travel aboard his ship except under highly unusual circumstances. Skywalker's droid and its astromech counterpart appear to be the sole exceptions; and thanks to your transmission data, we already know that that droid has remained on theMillennium Falcon ."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, not entirely convinced but knowing better than to argue the point. "Shall I put out an alert on theLady Luck , then?"

 "That won't be necessary," Thrawn said, and this time the satisfaction came through clearly. "I know exactly where Leia Organa Solo is going."

 Pellaeon stared at him. "You're not serious. Sir."

 "Perfectly serious, Captain," Thrawn said evenly. "Consider. Solo and Organa Solo have nothing to gain by simply transferring together to theLady Luck theMillennium Falcon is faster and far better defended. This exercise only makes sense if Organa Solo and the Wookiee are together." Thrawn smiled up at Pellaeon. "And given that, there is only one logical place for them to go."

 Pellaeon looked at the display, feeling slightly sandbagged. But the Grand Admiral's logic tracked clean. "Kashyyyk?"

 "Kashyyyk," Thrawn confirmed. "They know they can't evade our Noghri forever, and so they've decided to surround her with Wookiees. For all the good it will do them."

 Pellaeon felt his lip twitch. He'd been aboard one of the ships that had been sent to Kashyyyk to capture Wookiees for the Empire's slave trade. "It may not be as easy as it sounds, Admiral," he cautioned. "Kashyyyk's ecology can best be described as a layered deathtrap. And the Wookiees themselves are extremely capable fighters."

 "So are the Noghri," Thrawn countered coldly. "Now. What of Skywalker?"

 "His vector away from Athega was consistent with a course toward Jomark," Pellaeon told him. "Of course, he could easily have altered it once he was out of range of our probes."

 "He's going there," Thrawn said, lip twisting in a tight smile. "Our Jedi Master has said so, hasn't he?" The Grand Admiral glanced at the chrono on his display board. "We'll leave for Jomark immediately. How much lead time will we have?"

 "A minimum of four days, assuming that Skywalker's X-wing hasn't been overly modified. More than that, depending on how many stopovers he has to make on the way."

 "He'll make no stopovers," Thrawn said. "Jedi use a hibernation state for trips of such length. For our purposes, though, four days will be quite adequate."

 He straightened in his chair and touched a switch. The command room's lights came back up, the holographic sculptures fading away. "We'll need two more ships," he told Pellaeon. "An Interdictor Cruiser to bring Skywalker out of hyperspace where we want him, and some kind of freighter. An expendable one, preferably."

 Pellaeon blinked. "Expendable, sir?"

 "Expendable, Captain. We're going to set up the attack as a pure accidentan opportunity that will seem to have arisen while we were investigating a suspicious freighter for Rebellion munitions." He cocked an eyebrow. "That way, you see, we retain the option of turning him over to C'baoth if we choose to do so, without even Skywalker realizing he was actually ambushed."

 "Understood, sir," Pellaeon said. "With your permission, I'll get theChimaera underway." He turned to go

 And paused. Halfway across the room, one of the sculptures had not disappeared with the others. Sitting all alone in its globe of light, it slowly writhed on its pedestal like a wave in some bizarre alien ocean. "Yes," Thrawn said from behind him. "That one is indeed real."

 "It's... very interesting," Pellaeon managed. The sculpture was strangely hypnotic.

 "Isn't it?" Thrawn agreed, his voice sounding almost wistful. "It was my one failure, out on the Fringes. The one time when understanding a race's art gave me no insight at all into its psyche. At least not at the time. Now, I believe I'm finally beginning to understand them."

 "I'm sure that will prove useful in the future," Pellaeon offered diplomatically.

 "I doubt it," Thrawn said, in that same wistful voice. "I wound up destroying their world."

 Pellaeon swallowed. "Yes, sir," he said, starting again for the door. He winced only a little as he passed the sculpture.

 

 Chapter 16

 There was no dreaming in the Jedi hibernation trance. No dreaming, no consciousness, virtually no awareness of the outside world. It was very much like a coma, in fact, except for one interesting anomaly: despite the absence of true consciousness, Luke's time sense still somehow managed to function. He didn't understand it, exactly, but it was something he'd learned to recognize and use.

 It was that time sense, coupled with Artoo's frantic gurgling in the foggy distance, that was his first hint something was wrong.

 "All right, Artoo, I'm awake," he reassured the droid as he worked his way back toward consciousness. Blinking the gummy feeling out of his eyes, he gave the instruments a quick scan. The readings confirmed what his time sense had already told him: the X-wing had come out of hyperspace nearly twenty light-years short of Jomark. The proximity indicator registered two ships practically on top of him ahead, with a third off to one side in the distance. Still blinking, he raised his head for a look.

 And with a rush of adrenaline came fully awake. Directly ahead of him was what looked like a light freighter, a blazing overload in its engine section visible through crumpled and half-vaporized hull plates. Beyond it, looming like a dark cliff face, was an Imperial Star Destroyer.

 Anger, fear, aggressionthe dark side of the Force are they.With an effort, Luke forced down his fear. The freighter was between him and the Star Destroyer; concentrating on their larger prey, the Imperials might not even have noticed his arrival. "Let's get out of here, Artoo," he said, keying the controls back to manual and swinging the X-wing hard around. The etheric rudder whined in protest with the turn

 "Unidentified starfighter," a harsh voice boomed from the speaker. "This is the Imperial Star DestroyerChimaera . Transmit your identification code and state your business."

 So much for hoping he wouldn't be noticed. In the distance now, Luke could see what it was that had yanked the X-wing out of hyperspace: the third ship was an Interdictor Cruiser, the Empire's favorite tool for keeping opponents from jumping to lightspeed. Obviously, they'd been lying in wait for the freighter; it was just his bad luck that he'd run across the Interdictor's projected mass shadow and been kicked out of hyperspace along with it.

 The freighter. Closing his eyes briefly with concentration, Luke reached out with the Force, trying to discover whether it was a Republic ship, a neutral, or even a pirate that theChimaera had caught. But there was no hint of any life aboard. Either the crew had escaped, or else they'd already been taken prisoner.

 Either way, there was nothing Luke could do for them now. "Artoo, find me the nearest edge of that Interdictor's gravitywave cone," he ordered, throwing the X-wing into a stomach-churning downward drop that even the acceleration compensator couldn't quite handle. If he could keep the freighter directly between him and the Star Destroyer, he might be able to get out of range before they could bring a tractor beam to bear.

 "Unidentified starfighter." The harsh voice was starting to get angry. "I repeat, transmit your identification code or prepare to be detained."

 "Should have brought one of Han's false ID codes with me," Luke muttered to himself. "Artoo? Where's that edge estimate?"

 The droid beeped, and a diagram appeared on the computer scope. "That far, huh?" Luke murmured. "Well, nothing to do but go for it. Hang on."

 "Unidentified starfighter"

 The rest of the harangue was drowned out by the roar of the drive as Luke abruptly kicked the ship to full power. Almost lost in the noise was Artoo's questioning trilling. "No, I want the deflector shields down," Luke shouted back. "We need the extra speed."

 He didn't add that if the Star Destroyer was really serious about vaporizing them, the presence or absence of shields wouldn't matter much at this range, anyway. But Artoo probably already knew that.

 But if the Imperials didn't seem interested in vaporizing him out of hand, neither were they willing to just let him go. On the rear scope, he could see the Star Destroyer moving up and over the damaged freighter, trying to get clear of its interference.

 Luke threw a quick look at the proximity indicator. He was still within tractor beam range, and at their current relative speeds would remain so for the next couple of minutes. What he needed was some way to distract or blind them...

 "Artoo, I need a fast reprogramming on one of the proton torpedoes," he called. "I want to drop it at zero delta-v, then have it turn around and head straight aft. No sensors or homing codes, eitherI want it to go out cold. Can you do that?" There was an affirmative beep. "Good. As soon as it's ready, give me a warning and then let it go."

 He turned his attention back to the rear scope, gave the X-wing's course a slight readjustment. With its guidance sensors in their normal active state, the torpedo would be subject to the Star Destroyer's impressive array of jamming equipment; going out cold like this would limit the Imperials' response to trying to shoot it down with laser fire. The flip side of that, of course, was that if it wasn't aimedvery accurately, it would shoot right past its intended target without even a twitch.

 Artoo beeped; and with a slight lurch, the torpedo was away. Luke watched it go, reaching out with the Force to give it a slight realignment tap

 And a second later, with a spectacular multiple flash of sympathetic detonations, the freighter blew up.

 Luke looked at the proximity indicator, mentally crossing his fingers. Almost out of range now. If the debris from the freighter could screen off the tractor beam for a few more seconds, they should make it.

 Artoo warbled a warning. Luke glanced at the translation, then at the long-range scope, and felt his stomach tighten. Artoo warbled again, more insistently this time. "I see it, Artoo," Luke growled. It was, of course, the obvious tactic for the Imperials to employ. With the freighter no longer of any interest whatsoever, the Interdictor was changing position, swinging around to try to bring its huge gravity field projectors more fully to bear on the escaping X-wing. Luke watched as the cone-shaped field area angled across the scope...

 "Hang on, Artoo," he called; and, again too abruptly for the compensators to totally negate, he swung the X-wing into a right-angle turn, blasting laterally to their original course.

 From behind him came a shocked screech. "Quiet, Artoo, I know what I'm doing," he told the droid. Off to starboard now, the Star Destroyer was belatedly trying to shift its massive bulk, pivoting to track Luke's maneuver... and for the first time since the beginning of the encounter, flashes of laser fire began lancing out.

 Luke made a quick decision. Speed alone wasn't going to save him now, and a near miss could end the contest right here and now. "Deflectors up, Artoo," he instructed the droid, giving his full attention to his best evasive maneuvering. "Give me a balance between shield power and speed."

 Artoo beeped a response, and there was a slight drop in engine noise as the shields began drawing power. They were going slower, but so far the gamble seemed to be working. Caught off balance by Luke's right-angle maneuver, the Interdictor was now rotating in the wrong direction, its gravity beam sweeping across Luke's previous course instead of tracking the current one. Its commander was obviously trying to correct that mistake, but the sheer inertia of the ship's massive gravity generators was on Luke's side. If he could stay out of the Star Destroyer's range for another few seconds, he'd be out of the beam and free to escape to hyperspace. "Stand by for lightspeed," he told Artoo. "Don't worry about directionwe can do a short hop and set things up more carefully once we're clear."

 Artoo acknowledged

 And without warning, Luke was slammed hard against his harness.

 The Star Destroyer's tractor beam had them.

 Artoo shrilled in dismay; but Luke had no time to comfort the droid now. His straight-line course had suddenly become an arc, a sort of pseudoorbit with the Star Destroyer playing the role of planet at its center. Unlike a true orbit, though, this one wasn't stable, and as soon as the Imperials got another beam focused on him, the circle would quickly degenerate into a tight inward spiral. A spiral whose end point would be inside the Star Destroyer's hangar bay.

 He dropped the shields, throwing full power once again to the drive, knowing full well it was most likely a futile gesture. And he was rightfor a second the beam seemed to falter, but it quickly caught back up with him. Such a relatively minor change in speed was too small to foul up the beam's tracking equipment.

 But if he could find a way to arrange a more major change in speed...

 "Unidentified starfighter." The harsh voice was back, unmistakably gloating this time. "You have no chance of escape; further efforts will merely damage your vehicle. You are ordered to power down and prepare to dock."

 Luke clenched his teeth. This was going to be dangerous, but he'd run out of choices. And hehad heard stories of this working at least once before. Somewhere. "Artoo, we're going to try something tricky," he called to the droid. "On my signal, I want you to reverse-trigger the acceleration compensatorfull power, and bypass the cutoffs if you have to." Something warbled from the control panel, and he risked a quick look at the scope. His curving arc had brought him right to the edge of the Interdictor's gravity projection. "Artoo:now. "

 And with a scream of horribly stressed electronics, the X-wing came to a sudden dead stop.

 There wasn't even enough time for Luke to wonder what aboard his ship could possibly have made a scream like that before he was again thrown, even harder this time, against his harness. His thumbs, ready on the firing buttons, jabbed down hard, sending a pair of proton torpedoes lancing forward; simultaneously, he pulled the X-wing upward. The Star Destroyer's tractor beam, tracking him along his path, had momentarily gotten lost by his sudden maneuver. If the computers guiding that lock would now be considerate enough to latch onto the proton torpedoes instead of him

 And suddenly the torpedoes were gone, leaving behind only a wisp of their exhaust trail to show that they'd been snatched off their original course. The gamble had succeeded; the Star Destroyer was now steadily pulling in the wrong target.

 "We're free!" he snapped to Artoo, throwing full power to the drive. "Get ready for lightspeed."

 The droid trilled something, but Luke had no time to look down at the computer scope for the translation. Realizing their error, and recognizing there was insufficient time to reestablish a tractor lock, the Imperials had apparently decided to go for a straight kill. All the Star Destroyer's batteries seemed to open up at once, and Luke suddenly found himself trying to dodge a virtual sandstorm of laser fire. Forcing himself to relax, he let the Force flow through him, allowing it to guide his hands on the controls the way it did his lightsaber. The ship jumped once as a shot got through; in his peripheral vision he saw the tip of his dorsal/starboard laser cannon flash and disappear into a cloud of superheated plasma. A near miss burned past overhead; another, closer, scorched a line across the transparisteel canopy.

 Another warble came from the scope: they were clear of the Interdictor's gravity shadow. "Go!" Luke shouted to Artoo.

 And with a second, even more nerve-wrenching electronic scream from behind him, the sky ahead abruptly turned to starlines.

 They'd made it.

 

 For what seemed like a small eternity Thrawn gazed out the viewport, staring at the spot where Skywalker's X-wing had been when it had vanished. Surreptitiously, Pellaeon watched him, wondering tautly when the inevitable explosion would come. With half an ear he listened to the damage control reports corning from the Number Four tractor beam projector, carefully not getting himself involved with the cleanup.

 The destruction of one of theChimera 's ten projectors was a relatively minor loss. Skywalker's escape was not.

 Thrawn stirred and turned around. Pellaeon tensed "Come with me, Captain," the Grand Admiral said quietly, striding away down the bridge command walkway.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon murmured, falling into step behind him, the stories of how Darth Vader had dealt with subordinates' failures running through his mind.

 The bridge was uncommonly quiet as Thrawn led the way to the aft stairway and descended into the starboard crew pit. He walked past the crewers at their consoles, past the officers standing painfully erect behind them, and came to a halt at the control station for the starboard tractor beams. "Your name," he said, his voice excruciatingly calm.

 "Cris Pieterson, sir," the young man seated at the console answered, his eyes wary.

 "You were in charge of the tractor beam during our engagement with the starfighter." It was a statement, not a question.

 "Yes, sirbut what happened wasn't my fault."

 Thrawn's eyebrows arched, just a bit. "Explain."

 Pieterson started to gesture to the side, changed his mind in midmotion. "The target did something with his acceleration compensator that killed his velocity vector"

 "I'm aware of the facts," Thrawn cut in. "I'm waiting to hear why his escape wasn't your fault."

 "I was never properly trained for such an occurrence, sir," Pieterson said, a flicker of defiance touching his eyes. "The computer lost the lock, but seemed to pick it up again right away. There was no way for me to know it had really picked up something else until"

 "Until the proton torpedoes detonated against the projector?"

 Pieterson held his gaze evenly. "Yes, sir."

 For a long moment Thrawn studied him. "Who is your officer?" he asked at last.

 Pieterson's eyes shifted to the right. "Ensign Colclazure, sir."

 Slowly, deliberately, Thrawn turned to the tall man standing rigidly at attention with his back to the walkway. "You are in charge of this man?"

 Colclazure swallowed visibly. "Yes, sir," he said.

 "Was his training also your responsibility?"

 "Yes, sir," Colclazure said again.

 "Did you, during that training, run through any scenarios similar to what just happened?"

 "I... don't remember, sir," the ensign admitted. "The standard training packagedoes include scenarios concerning loss of lock and subsequent reestablishment confirmation."

 Thrawn threw a brief glance back down at Pieterson. "Did you recruit him as well, Ensign?"

 "No, sir. He was a conscript."

 "Does that make him less worthy of your training time than a normal enlistee?"

 "No, sir." Colclazure's eyes flicked to Pieterson. "I've always tried to treat my subordinates equally."

 "I see." Thrawn considered a moment, then half turned to look past Pellaeon's shoulder. "Rukh."

 Pellaeon started as Rukh brushed silently past him; he hadn't realized the Noghri had followed them down. Thrawn waited until Rukh was standing at his side, then turned back to Colclazure. "Do you know the difference between an error and a mistake, Ensign?"

 The entire bridge had gone deathly still. Colclazure swallowed again, his face starting to go pale. "No, sir."

 "Anyone can make an error, Ensign. But that error doesn't become a mistake until you refuse to correct it." He raised a finger

 And, almost lazily, pointed.

 Pellaeon never even saw Rukh move. Pieterson certainly never had time to scream.

 From farther down the crew pit came the sound of someone trying valiantly not to be sick. Thrawn glanced over Pellaeon's shoulder again and gestured, and the silence was further broken by the sound of a pair of stormtroopers coming forward. "Dispose of it," the Grand Admiral ordered them, turning away from Pieterson's crumpled body and pinning Colclazure with a stare. "The error, Ensign," he told the other softly, "has now been corrected. You may begin training a replacement."

 He held Colclazure's eyes another heartbeat. Then, seemingly oblivious to the tension around him, he turned back to Pellaeon. "I want a full technical/tactical readout on the last few seconds of that encounter, Captain," he said, all calm business again. "I'm particularly interested in his lightspeed vector."

 "I have it all here, sir," a lieutenant spoke up a bit hesitantly, stepping forward to offer the Grand Admiral a data pad.

 "Thank you." Thrawn glanced at it briefly, handed it to Pellaeon. "We'll have him, Captain," he said, starting back down the crew pit toward the stairway. "Very soon now, we'll have him."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon agreed cautiously, hurrying to catch up with the other. "I'm sure it's just a matter of time."

 Thrawn raised an eyebrow. "You misunderstand me," he said mildly. "I mean that literally. He's out there right now, not very far away. And" he smiled slyly at Pellaeon "he's helpless."

 Pellaeon frowned. "I don't understand, sir."

 "That maneuver he used has an interesting side effect I suspect he didn't know about," the Grand Admiral explained. "Backfiring an acceleration compensator like that does severe damage to the adjoining hyperdrive. A light-year away, no farther, and it will fail completely. All we have to do is make a search along that vector, or persuade others to do our searching for us, and he'll be ours. You follow?"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said. "Shall I contact the rest of the fleet?"

 Thrawn shook his head. "Preparing for the Sluis Van attack is the fleet's top priority at the moment. No, I think we'll subcontract this one out. I want you to send messages to all the major smuggling chiefs whose groups operate in this areaBrasck, Karrde, Par'tah, any others we have on file. Use their private frequencies and encrypt codesa little reminder of how much we know about each of them should help ensure their cooperation. Give them Skywalker's hyperspace vector and offer a bounty of thirty thousand for his capture."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon glanced back down the crew pit, at the activity still going on around the tractor beam station. "Sir, if you knew that Skywalker's escape was only temporary...?"

 "The Empire is at war, Captain," the Grand Admiral said, his voice cold. "We cannot afford the luxury of men whose minds are so limited they cannot adapt to unexpected situations."

 He looked significantly at Rukh, then turned those glowing eyes back on Pellaeon. "Carry out your orders, Captain. Skywalkerwill be ours. Alive... or otherwise."

 

 Chapter 17

 In front of Luke, the scopes and displays glowed softly as the diagnostic messages, most of them bordered in red, scrolled past. Beyond the displays, through the canopy, he could see the X-wing's nose, lit faintly by the sheen of distant starlight. Beyond that were the stars themselves, blazing all around him with cold brilliance.

 And that was all. No sun, no planets, no asteroids, no cometary bodies. No warships, transports, satellites, or probes. Nothing. He and Artoo were stranded, very literally, in the middle of nowhere.

 The computer's diagnostic package came to an end. "Artoo?" he called. "What've you got?"

 From behind him came a distinctly mournful electronic moan, and the droid's reply appeared on the computer scope. "That bad, huh?"

 Artoo moaned again, and the computer's summary was replaced by the droid's own assessment of their situation.

 It wasn't good. Luke's reverse-triggering of the acceleration compensator had caused an unanticipated feedback surge into both hyperdrive motivatorsnot enough to fry them on the spot, but scorching them badly enough to cause sudden failure ten minutes into their escape. At the Point Four the ship had been doing at the time, that translated into approximately half a light-year of distance. Just for good measure, the same power surge had also completely crystallized the subspace radio antenna.

 "In other words," Luke said, "we can't leave, we aren't likely to be found, and we can't call for help. Does that about sum it up?"

 Artoo beeped an addition. "Right," Luke sighed. "And we can't stay here. Not for long, anyway."

 Luke rubbed a hand across his chin, forcing back the sense of dread gnawing at him. Giving in to fear would only rob him of the ability to think, and that was the last thing he could afford to lose at this point. "All right," he said slowly. "Try this. We take the hyperdrive motivators off both engines and see if we can salvage enough components to put together a single functional one. If we can, we remount it somewhere in the middle of the aft fuselage where it can handle both engines. Maybe where the S-Foil servo actuator is nowwe don't need that to get home. Possible?"

 Artoo whistled thoughtfully. "I'm not asking if it'll be easy," Luke said patiently as the droid's response came up. "Just if it would be possible."

 Another whistle, another pessimistic message. "Well, let's give it a try anyway," Luke told him, unstrapping his restraints and trying to wriggle around in the cramped confines of the cockpit. If he pulled off the back of the ejection seat, he would be able to get into the cargo compartment and the tools stored there.

 Artoo warbled something else. "Don't worry, I'm not going to get stuck," Luke assured him, changing his mind and reaching for the in-cockpit pouches instead. The gloves and helmet seals for his flight suit were stored there; it'd be just as easy at this point to gear himself for vacuum and then get into the cargo compartment through its underside hatch. "If you want to be helpful, you might pull up the maintenance specs and find out exactly how I go about getting one of those motivators out. And cheer up, will you? You're starting to sound like Threepio."

 Artoo was still jabbering indignantly over that characterization when the last of Luke's helmet seals cut off the sound. But hedid sound less frightened.

 

 It took nearly two hours for Luke to get past all the other cables and tubing in the way and remove the port engine hyperdrive motivator from its socket.

 It took less than a minute more to discover that Artoo's earlier pessimism had been justified.

 "It's riddled with cracks," Luke told the droid grimly, turning the bulky box over in his hands. "The whole shield casing. Just hairlines, reallyyou can barely see some of them. But they run most of the length of the sides."

 Artoo gave a soft gurgle, a comment which required no translation. Luke hadn't done a lot of X-wing maintenance, but he knew enough to recognize that without an intact superconducting shield, a hyperdrive motivator was little more than a box of interconnected spare parts. "Let's not give up yet," he reminded Artoo. "If the other motivator's casing is all right we may still be in business."

 Collecting his tool kit, feeling inordinately clumsy in zero-gee freefall, he made his way under the X-wing's fuselage to the starboard engine. It took only a few minutes to remove the proper access cover and tie back some of the interfering cables. Then, trying to get both his faceplate and his glow rod together in the opening without blinding himself, he peered inside.

 A careful look at the motivator casing showed that there was no need to continue the operation.

 For a long moment he just hung there, one knee bumping gently against the power surge vent, wondering what in the name of the Force they were going to do now. His X-wing, so sturdy and secure in even the thick of combat, seemed now to be little more than a terribly fragile thread by which his life was hanging

 He looked around himlooked at the emptiness and the distant starsand as he did so, the vague sense of falling that always accompanied zero-gee came flooding back in on him. A memory flashed: hanging from the underside of Cloud City, weak from fear and the shock of losing his right hand, wondering how long he would have the strength to hang on.Leia, he called silently, putting all the power of his new Jedi skill into the effort.Leia, hear me. Answer me.

 There was no answer except for the echoing of the call through Luke's own mind. But then, he hadn't expected one. Leia was long gone, safe on Kashyyyk by now, under the protection of Chewbacca and a whole planet of Wookiees.

 He wondered if she'd ever find out what had happened to him.

 For the Jedi, there is no emotion; there is peace.Luke took a deep breath, forcing back the black thoughts. No, he would not give up. And if the hyperdrive couldn't be fixed... well, perhaps there was something else they could try. "I'm coming in, Artoo," he announced, replacing the access panel and again collecting his tools. "While you're waiting, I want you to pull everything we've got on the subspace radio antenna."

 Artoo had the data assembled by the time Luke got the cockpit canopy sealed over him again. Like the hyperdrive data, it wasn't especially encouraging. Made of ten kilometers of ultrathin superconducting wire wound tightly around a U-shaped core, a subspace radio antenna wasn't something that was supposed to be field-repairable.

 But then, Luke wasn't the average X-wing pilot, either.

 "All right, here's what we're going to do," he told the droid slowly. "The antenna's outer wiring is useless, but it doesn't look like the core itself was damaged. If we can find ten kilometers of superconducting wire somewhere else on the ship, we should be able to make ourselves a new one. Right?"

 Artoo thought about that, gurgled an answer. "Oh, come on now," Luke admonished him. "You mean to tell me you can't do what some nonintelligent wire-wrapping machine does all day?"

 The droid's beeping response sounded decidedly indignant. The translation that scrolled across the computer scope was even more so. "Well, then, there's no problem," Luke said, suppressing a smile. "I'd guess either the repulsorlift drive or else the sensor jammer will have all the wire we need. Check on that, will you?"

 There was a pause, and Artoo quietly whistled something. "Yes, I know what the life support's limitations are," Luke agreed. "That's why you'll be the one doing all the wiring. I'm going to have to spend most of the time back in hibernation trance."

 Another series of whistles. "Don't worry about it," Luke assured him. "As long as I come up every few days for food and water, hibernation is perfectly safe. You've seen me do it a dozen times, remember? Now get busy and run those checks."

 Neither of the two components had quite the length of wiring they needed, but after poking around a little in the more esoteric sections of his technical memory, Artoo came to the conclusion that the eight kilometers available in the sensor jammer should be adequate to create at least a low-efficiency antenna. He conceded, however, that there was no way to know for sure until they actually tried it.

 It was another hour's work for Luke to get the jammer and antenna out of the ship, strip the ruined wire off the core of the latter, and move everything to the upper aft fuselage where Artoo's two graspers could reach it. Jury-rigging a framework to feed the wire and protect it from snagging took another hour, and he took a half hour more to watch the operation from inside to make sure it was going smoothly.

 At which point there was nothing left for him to do.

 "Now, don't forget," he warned the droid as he settled himself as comfortably into the cockpit seat as possible. "If anything goes wrongor you eventhink something's about to go wrong you go ahead and wake me up. Got that?"

 Artoo whistled his assurances. "All right," Luke said, more to himself than to the droid. "I guess this is it, then."

 He took a deep breath, letting his gaze sweep one last time across the starry sky. If this didn't work... But there was no point in worrying about that now. He'd done all he could for the moment. It was time now for him to draw upon inner peace, and to entrust his fate to Artoo.

 To Artoo... and to the Force.

 He took another deep breath.Leia , he called, uselessly, one last time. Then, turning his mind and thoughts inward, he began to slow his heart.

 The last thing he remembered before the darkness took him was the odd sense that someone, somewhere, had in fact heard that final call....

 

 Leia...

 Leia jerked awake. "Luke?" she called, propping herself up on one elbow and peering into the dimness surrounding her. She could have sworn she'd heard his voice. His voice, or perhaps the touch of his mind.

 But there was no one. Nothing but the cramped space of theLady Luck 's main cabin and the pounding of her own heart and the familiar background sounds of a ship in flight. And, a dozen meters away in the cockpit, the unmistakable sense of Chewbacca's presence. And as she woke further, she remembered that Luke was hundreds of light-years away.

 It must have been a dream.

 With a sigh, she lay back down. But even as she did so, she heard the subtle change in sound and vibration pattern as the main sublight drive shut down and the repulsorlift kicked in. Listening closer, she could hear the faint sound of air rushing past the hull.

 Slightly ahead of schedule, they were coming in to Kashyyyk.

 She got out of bed and found her clothes, feeling her quiet misgivings gnawing with renewed force as she got dressed. Han and Chewbacca could make all the reassuring noises they wanted, but she'd read the diplomatic reports, and she knew full well how strong the undercurrent of resentment was that the Wookiees still harbored toward humans. Whether her status as a member of the New Republic hierarchy would make up for that was, in her view, entirely problematical.

 Especially given her chronic difficulty in understanding their language.

 The thought made her wince, and not for the first time since leaving Nkllon, she wished she'd had Lando use some other droid for his little voice-matching trick. Having Threepio and his seven-million-language translator along would have made this whole thing so much less awkward.

 TheLady Luck was already deep into the atmosphere by the time she arrived in the cockpit, skimming low over a surprisingly flat layer of clouds and making smooth curves around the treetops that were occasionally visible poking through them. She remembered when she'd first come across a reference to the size of Kashyyyk's trees; she'd had a full-blown argument with the Senate librarian at the time about how the government could not afford to have its records data shot through with such clearly absurd errors. Even now, with them right in front of her, she found the things hard to believe. "Is that size typical forwroshyr trees?" she asked Chewbacca as she slipped into the seat beside him.

 Chewbacca growled a negative: the ones visible above the clouds were probably half a kilometer taller than the average. "They're the ones you put nursery rings on, then," Leia nodded.

 He looked at her, and even with her limited ability to read Wookiee faces his surprise was quite evident. "Don't look so shocked," she admonished him with a smile. "Some of us humans know a little about Wookiee culture. We aren'tall ignorant savages, you know."

 For a moment he just stared at her. Then, with an urf-urf-urf of laughter, he turned back to the controls.

 Ahead and to the right, a tighter group of the extra-tallwroshyr trees had come into view. Chewbacca turned theLady Luck toward it, and within a few minutes they were close enough for Leia to see the network of cables or thin branches linking them together just above cloud height. Chewbacca circled the ship partway around, bringing it within the perimeter; and then, with just a growl of warning, dropped sharply down into the clouds.

 Leia grimaced. She'd never really liked flying blind, especially in an area crowded with obstacles the size ofwroshyr trees. But almost before theLady Luck was completely enveloped by the thick white fog they were clear of it again. Immediately below them was another cloud layer. Chewbacca dropped them into that one, too, and drove through it to clear air again

 Leia inhaled sharply. Filling the entire gap between the group of massive trees, apparently hanging suspended in midair, was a city.

 Not just a collection of primitive huts and fires like the Ewok tree villages on Endor. This was a real, genuine city, stretching out over a square kilometer or more of space. Even from this distance she could see that the buildings were large and complex, some of them two or three stories high, and that the avenues between them were straight and carefully laid out. The huge boles of the trees poked up around and, in some places, through the city, giving the illusion of giant brown columns supporting a rooftop of clouds. Surrounding the city on all sides, strangely colored searchlight beams lanced outward.

 Beside her, Chewbacca rumbled a question. "No, I've never even seen holos of a Wookiee village," she breathed. "My loss, obviously." They were getting closer now; close enough for her to see that the Cloud City-type unipod she'd expected was nowhere to be seen.

 For that matter, there was no support ofany kind visible. Was the whole city being held up by repulsorlifts?

 TheLady Luck banked slightly to the left. Directly ahead of them now, at one edge of the city and a little above it, was a circular platform rimmed with landing lights. The platform seemed to be sticking straight out from one of the trees, and it took a few seconds for her to realize that the whole thing was nothing more or less than the remnant of a huge limb that had been horizontally cut off near the trunk.

 A not insignificant engineering feat. Dimly, she wondered how they'd disposed of the rest of the limb.

 The platform didn't look nearly big enough to accommodate a ship the size of theLady Luck, but a quick glance back at the city itself showed that the apparent smallness was merely a trick of the tree's deceptive scale. By the time Chewbacca put them down on the fire-blackened wood, in fact, it was clear that the platform could not only easily handle theLady Luck, but probably full-sized passenger liners, as well.

 Or, for that matter, Imperial Strike Cruisers. Perhaps, Leia decided, she shouldn't inquire too deeply into the circumstances of the platform's construction.

 She had half expected the Wookiees to send a delegation out to meet her, and she turned out to have been half right. Two of the giant aliens were waiting beside theLady Luck as Chewbacca lowered the entry ramp, indistinguishable to her untrained eye except for their slightly different heights and the noticeably different designs of the wide baldrics curving from shoulder to waist across their brown fur. The taller of the two, his baldric composed of gold-threaded tan, took a step forward as Leia headed down the ramp. She continued toward him, using all the calming Jedi techniques she knew, praying that this wouldn't be as awkward as she was very much afraid it would be. Chewbacca was hard enough for her to understand, and he'd been living out among humans for decades. A native Wookiee, speaking a native dialect, was likely to be totally incomprehensible.

 The tall Wookiee bowed his head slightly and opened his mouth. Leia braced herself

 [I to you, Leiaorganasolo, bring greetings,] he roared. [I to Rwookrrorro welcome you.]

 Leia felt her jaw drop in astonishment. "Ah... thank you," she managed. "I'mahhonored to be here."

 [As we by yourr presence arre honored,] he growled politely. [I am Ralrracheen. You may find it easierr to call me Ralrra.]

 "I'm honored to meet you," Leia nodded, still feeling a little dazed by it all. Apart from the odd extended growling of his finalr sounds, Ralrra's Wookiee speech was perfectly understandable. Listening to him, in fact, it was as if all the static she'd always had to plow through had suddenly cleared away. She could feel her face warming, and hoped her surprise didn't show.

 Apparently, it did. Beside her, Chewbacca was urf-urf-urfing quietly again. "Let me guess," she suggested dryly, looking up at him. "You've had a speech impediment all these years and never thought to mention it to me?"

 Chewbacca laughed even louder. [Chewbacca speaks most excellently,] Ralrra told her. [It is I who has a speech impediment. Strangely, it is the kind of trouble that humans find easierr to understand.]

 "I see," Leia said, though she didn't entirely. "Were you an ambassador, then?"

 Abruptly, the air around her seemed to grow chilly. [I was a slave to the Empirre,] Ralrra growled softly. [As was Chewbacca also, beforre Hansolo freed him. My captorrs found me useful, to speak with the otherr Wookiee slaves.]

 Leia shivered. "I'm sorry," was all she could think of to say.

 [You must not be,] he insisted. [My role gave me much information about the Empirre's forces. Information that proved useful when yourr Alliance freed us.]

 Abruptly, Leia realized that Chewbacca was no longer standing at her side. To her shock, she saw that he was locked in a death grip with the other Wookiee, his bowcaster trapped uselessly against his shoulder by the other's massive arm. "Chewie!" she snapped, hand dropping to the blaster belted at her side.

 She'd barely gotten hold of it, though, before Ralrra's shaggy hand landed in an iron grip on top of hers. [Do not disturb them,] the Wookiee told her firmly. [Chewbacca and Salporin have been friends since childhood, and have not seen each otherr in many yearrs. Theirr greeting must not be interrupted.]

 "Sorry," Leia murmured, dropping her hand to her side and feeling like an idiot.

 [Chewbacca said in his message that you requirre sanctuary,] Ralrra continued, perhaps recognizing her embarrassment. [Come. I will show you the preparations we have made.]

 Leia's eyes flicked to Chewbacca and Salporin, still clinging to each other. "Perhaps we should wait for the others," she suggested, a little uncertainly.

 [Therre will be no dangerr.] Ralrra drew himself up to his full height. [Leiaorganasolo, you must understand. Without you and yourr people many of us would still be slaves to the Empirre. Slaves, orr dead at theirr hand. To you and yourr Republic we owe a life debt.]

 "Thank you," Leia said, feeling the last bit of residual tension draining away. There was a great deal about Wookiee culture and psychology that was still opaque to her; but the life debt, at least, she understood very well. Ralrra had formally committed himself to her safety now, that commitment backed up by Wookiee honor, tenacity, and raw strength.

 [Come,] Ralrra growled, gesturing toward what looked like an open-cage liftcar at the edge of the platform. [We will go to the village.]

 "Certainly," Leia said. "That reminds meI was going to ask how you keep the village in place. Do you use repulsorlifts?"

 [Come,] Ralrra said. [I will show you.]

 

 The village was not, in fact, being held up by repulsorlifts. Nor with unipods, tractor anchorlines, or any other clever scheme of modern technology. Which made it all the more sobering for Leia to realize that the Wookiees' method was, in its own way, more sophisticated than any of them.

 The village was held up by branches.

 [It was a great task, a village of this size to build,] Ralrra told her, waving a massive hand upward at the latticework above them. [Many of the branches at the level desired werre removed. Those which remained then grew strongerr and fasterr.]

 "It looks almost like a giant spiderweb," Leia commented, peering from the liftcar at the underside of the village and trying not to think about the kilometers of empty space directly beneath them. "How did you mesh them together like that?"

 [We did not. Through theirr own growth they arre a unity.]

 Leia blinked. "Excuse me?"

 [They have grown togetherr,] Ralrra explained. [When twowroshyr branches meet, they grow into one. Togetherr then they sprout new branches in all directions.]

 He growled something under his breath, a word or phrase for which Leia had no translation. [It is a living reminderr of the unity and strength of the Wookiee people,] he added, almost to himself.

 Leia nodded silently. It was also, she realized, a strong indication that all thewroshyr trees in this bunch were a single giant plant, with a unified or at least an intermixed root system. Did the Wookiees realize that? Or had their obvious reverence for the trees forbidden such thinking and research?

 Not that curiosity would help them all that much in this case. Dropping her gaze, she peered down into the hazy dimness beneath the liftcar. Somewhere down there were the shorterwroshyrs and hundreds of other types of trees that made up the vast jungles of Kashyyyk. Several different arboreal ecosystems were reputed to exist in the jungle, arranged in roughly horizontal layers descending toward the ground, each layer more deadly than the one above. She didn't know whether the Wookiees had ever even made it all the way down to the surface; it was for sure that no one who had would have taken the time for leisurely botanical studies.

 [They arre calledkroyies,] Ralrra said.

 Leia blinked at the odd non sequitur. But even as she opened her mouth to ask what he was talking about, she spotted the double wedge of birds flying swiftly through the sky beneath them. "Those birds?" she asked.

 [Yes. Once they werre a prize food to the Wookiee people. Now even the poorr may eat them.] He pointed toward the edge of the village above them, to the haze of light coming from the searchlights she'd seen during their approach. [Kroyieswill come to those lights,] he explained. [Hunterrs therre await them.]

 Leia nodded understanding; she'd seen visual lures of varying degrees of sophistication used to attract food animals on other worlds. "Don't all those clouds interfere with their effectiveness, though?"

 [Through the clouds they work best,] Ralrra said. [The clouds spread the light. Akroyie will see it from great distances and come.]

 As he spoke, the double wedge of birds banked sharply, climbing toward the clouds overhead and the lights playing against them. [Even so, you see. Tonight we shall perhaps dine on one of them.]

 "I'd like that," she said. "I remember Chewie saying once that they were delicious."

 [Then we must return to the village,] Ralrra said, touching the liftcar's control. With a creak of the cable, it started upward. [We had hoped to shelterr you in one of the morre luxurious homes,] he commented as they started upward. [But Chewbacca would not allow it.]

 He gestured, and for the first time Leia noticed the homes built directly into the tree beside them. Some of them were multistoried and quite elaborate; all of them seemed to open up directly onto empty space. "Chewbacca understands my preferences," she told Ralrra, suppressing a shiver. "I was wondering why the liftcar went this far down past the village proper."

 [The liftcarr is used mainly forr cargo transportation orr the ill,] Ralrra said. [Most Wookiees preferr to climb the trees naturally.]

 He held out a hand to her, palm up; and as the muscles under the skin and fur flexed, a set of wickedly curved claws slid into sight from hidden fingertip sheaths.

 Leia swallowed hard. "I didn't realize Wookiees had claws like those," she said. "Though I suppose I should have. Youare arboreal, after all."

 [To live among trees without them would be impossible,] Ralrra agreed. The claws retracted again, and the Wookiee waved the hand upward. [Even vine travel would be difficult without them.]

 "Vines?" Leia echoed, frowning up through the liftcar's transparent roof. She hadn't noticed any vines on the trees earlier, and didn't really see any now. Her eyes fell on the cable running from the liftcar up into the leaves and branches above...

 The darkgreen cable.

 "That cable?" she asked carefully, nodding toward it. "That's a vine?"

 [It akshyy vine is,] he assured her. [Do not worry about its strength. It is strongerr than composite cable material, and cannot even by blasterrs be cut. Too, it is self-repairing.]

 "I see," Leia said, staring at the vine and fighting hard against the sudden sense of panic. She'd flown all around the galaxy in hundreds of different types of airspeeders and spaceships without the slightest twinge of acrophobia, but this hanging out on the edge of nowhere without a solid powered cockpit around her was something else entirely. The warm sense of security she'd been feeling at being on Kashyyyk was starting to evaporate. "Have the vines ever broken?" she asked, trying to sound casual.

 [In the past, it sometimes happened,] Ralrra said. [Various parasites and fungi, if unchecked, can erode them. Now, we employ safeguards which ourr ancestorrs did not have. Liftcarrs such as this one contain emergency repulsorlift systems.]

 "Ah," Leia said, the momentary discomfort easing as she once again found herself feeling like a raw and not very bright diplomatic beginner. It was easy to forget that, despite their somewhat quaint-looking arboreal villages and their own animalistic appearance, Wookiees generally were quite at home with high technology.

 The liftcar rose above the level of the village floor. Chewbacca and Salporin were standing there waiting for them, the former fingering his bowcaster and giving the little twitches that Leia had learned to associate with impatience. Ralrra brought them to a stop at the level of the wide exit ramp and opened the door, Salporin stepping forward as he did so to offer Leia his hand in assistance.

 [We have made arrangements forr you and Chewbacca to stay at Salporin's home,] Ralrra said as they stepped out onto relatively solid ground again. [It is not farr. Therre arre transports available, if you wish.]

 Leia looked out across the nearest parts of the village. She wanted very much to walk, to get out among the people and start getting the feel of the place. But after all the effort they'd put into sneaking her onto Kashyyyk in the first place, parading herself in front of the whole population would probably not be the smartest thing to do. "A transport would probably be best," she told Ralrra.

 Chewbacca growled something as they came up to him. [She wished to see the village's structurre,] Ralrra told him. [We arre now ready to go.]

 Chewbacca gave another growl of displeasure, but returned his bowcaster to his shoulder and strode off without further comment toward a repulsor sled parked at the side of the road perhaps twenty meters away. Ralrra and Leia followed, with Salporin bringing up the rear. The houses and other buildings began right at the edge of the matted branches, Leia had already noted, without anything more substantial than a few twistedkshyy vines between them and empty space. Ralrra had implied that the homes clinging to the trees themselves were the more prestigious ones; perhaps those here at the edge belonged to the upper middle class. Idly, she looked at the nearest of them, glancing into the windows as they passed. A face moved into view in the shadows behind one of them, catching her eye

 "Chewie!" she gasped. Even as her hand darted for her blaster the face vanished. But there was no mistaking those bulging eyes and protruding jaw and steel-gray skin.

 Chewbacca was at her side in an instant, bowcaster in hand. "One of those creatures who attacked us on Bimmisaari is in there," she told him, reaching out with all the Jedi sense she could muster. Nothing. "At that window," she added, pointing with her blaster. "He was right there."

 Chewbacca barked an order, sliding his massive bulk between Leia and the house and easing her slowly backwards, his bowcaster weaving back and forth across the structure in a covering pattern. Ralrra and Salporin were already at the house, each carrying a pair of wicked-looking knives they'd pulled from somewhere. They took up flanking positions beside the front door; and with a brilliant flash from his bowcaster, Chewbacca shot the door in.

 From somewhere in toward the center of the village someone roareda long, ululating Wookiee howl of anger or alarm that seemed to echo from the buildings and massive trees. Even before Ralrra and Salporin had disappeared into the house the howl was being taken up by other voices, rising in number and volume until it seemed as if half the village had joined in. Leia found herself pressing against Chewbacca's hairy back, wincing at the sheer ferocity in that call and flashing back to the Bimmisaari marketplace reacting to her jewelry theft.

 Except that these weren't funny little yellow-clad Bimms. They were giant, violently strong Wookiees.

 A large crowd had begun to form by the time Ralrra and Salporin emerged from the housea crowd that Chewbacca paid no more attention to than he had the howling as he kept his eyes and bowcaster trained on the house. The other two Wookiees also ignored the crowd, disappearing around opposite sides of the house. They reappeared seconds later, their manner that of hunters who'd come up dry.

 "He was there," Leia insisted as they returned to where she and Chewbacca stood. "I saw him."

 [That may be true,] Ralrra said, slipping his knives back into hidden sheaths behind his baldric. Salporin, his attention still back on the house, kept his own knives ready. [But we found no trace of anyone.]

 Leia bit at her lip, eyes flicking across the area. There were no other houses near enough for the alien to have crossed to without her and Chewbacca seeing him. No cover of any sort, for that matter, on this side of the house. On the other side, there was nothing but the edge of the village.

 "He went over the edge," she realized suddenly. "He must have. Either worked his way under the village with climbing gear or else met a craft hovering down below."

 [That is unlikely,] Ralrra said, starting past her. [But possible. I will go down the liftcarr, to try and discoverr him.]

 Chewbacca reached a hand out to stop him, growling a negative. [You arre right,] Ralrra conceded, though clearly reluctantly. [Yourr safety, Leiaorganasolo, is the most important thing at this point. We will take you to safety first, and then make inquiries about this alien.]

 To safety.Leia gazed at the house, a shiver running up her back. And wondered if there would ever again be such a thing for her as safety.

 

 Chapter 18

 The trilling code, coming from somewhere far behind him, startled Luke up out of his dreamless sleep. "Okay, Artoo, I'm awake," he said groggily, reaching up to rub at his eyes. His knuckles bumped into the visor of his flight helmet, and the impact did a bit to dissipate the fog still swirling through his mind. He couldn't remember exactly the circumstances under which he'd gone into hibernation, but he had the distinct feeling that Artoo had brought him out too soon. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, trying to track down exactly what it was the droid was supposed to be doing.

 The trilling changed to an anxious-sounding warble. Still fighting to get his eyes properly focused, Luke searched out the computer scope for the translation. To his mild surprise, it was dark. As were all the rest of his instruments; and then it came back to him. He was trapped in deep space, with all the X-wing's systems shut down except power for Artoo and minimal life support for himself.

 And Artoo was supposed to be winding a new subspace radio antenna. Twisting a slightly stiff neck, he turned halfway around to look back at the droid, wondering what the problem was

 And felt his muscles twitch with surprise. There, bearing rapidly down on them, was another ship.

 He spun back around, fully awake now, hands jabbing for the bank of power switches and slapping them all on. But it was so much useless reflex. Even with shortcuts, it would still take nearly fifteen minutes to bring the X-wing's engines from a cold start to any serious possibility of flight, let alone combat. If the intruder was unfriendly...

 Using the emergency maneuvering jets, he got the X-wing turning slowly around to face the approaching ship. The scopes and sensors were starting to come back on line again, confirming what his eyes had already told him: his visitor was a midsized, slightly dilapidated-looking Corellian bulk freighter. Not the sort of ship the Imperials usually used, and there were certainly no Imperial markings on its hull.

 But under the circumstances, it was just as unlikely that it was an innocent freight handler, either. A pirate, perhaps? Luke reached out with the Force, trying to get a sense of the crew...

 Artoo warbled, and Luke glanced down at the computer scope. "Yes, I noticed that, too," Luke told him. "But a normal bulk freighter might be able to pull that kind of deceleration if it was empty. Why don't you do a quick analysis of the sensor readings, see if you can spot any weapons emplacements."

 The droid beeped an acknowledgment, and Luke gave the other instruments a quick scan. The primary laser cannon capacitors were at half charge now, with the main sublight drive about halfway through its preflight sequence.

 And the flashing radio signal indicated that he was being hailed.

 Bracing himself, Luke flipped on the receiver. "need assistance?" a cool female voice said. "Repeating: unidentified starfighter, this is the freighterWild Karrde . Do you need assistance?"

 "Wild Karrde, this is New Republic X-wing AA-589," Luke identified himself. "As a matter of fact, yes, I could use some help."

 "Acknowledged, X-wing," the other said. "What seems to be the problem?"

 "Hyperdrive," Luke told her, watching the ship closely as it continued its approach. A minute earlier he'd rotated to face the freighter's approach; the other pilot had responded with a slight sidling drift of her own, with the result that theWild Karrde was no longer in line with the X-wing's lasers. Probably just being cautious... but there were other possibilities. "I've lost both motivators," he continued. "Cracked shield cases, probably some other problems, too. I don't suppose you'd be carrying any spares?"

 "Not for a ship that size." There was a short pause. "I'm instructed to tell you that if you'd care to come aboard, we can offer you passage to our destination system."

 Luke reached out with the Force, trying to measure the sense behind the words. But if there was deceit there, he couldn't detect it. And even if there was, he had precious little choice. "Sounds good," he said. "Any chance you could take my ship, too?"

 "I doubt you could afford our shipping rates," the other told him dryly. "I'll check with the captain, but don't get your hopes up. We'd have to take it in tow, anywayour holds are pretty full at the moment."

 Luke felt his lip twitch. A fully loaded bulk freighter couldn't possibly have managed the deceleration profile Artoo had noted earlier. Either they were lying about that, or else that normal-looking drive system had undergone a complete and massive upgrading.

 Which made theWild Karrde either a smuggler, a pirate, or a disguised warship. And the New Republic had no disguised warships.

 The other pilot was talking again. "If you'll hold your present position, X-wing, we'll move up close enough to throw a force cylinder out to you," she said. "Unless you'd rather suit up and spacewalk across."

 "The cylinder sounds fastest," Luke said, deciding to try a light verbal probe. "I don't suppose either of us has any reason to hang around this place. How did you happen to wind up out here, anyway?"

 "We can handle a limited amount of baggage," the other went on, ignoring the question. "I imagine you'll want to bring your astromech droid along, too."

 So much for the light verbal probe. "Yes, I will," he told her.

 "All right, then, stand by. Incidentally, the captain says the transport fee will be five thousand."

 "Understood," Luke said, unstrapping his restraints. Opening the side pouches, he pulled out his gloves and helmet seal and folded them into his flight suit's chest pockets where he'd have quick access to them. A force cylinder was relatively foolproof, but accidents could always happen. Besides which, if theWild Karrde 's crew was hoping to pick themselves up a free X-wing, shutting the cylinder down halfway through the operation would be the simplest and least messy way to dispose of him.

 The crew. Luke paused, straining his senses toward the ship moving steadily toward him. There was something wrong there; something he could feel but couldn't quite track down.

 Artoo warbled anxiously. "No, she didn't answer the question," Luke agreed. "But I can't think of any legitimate reason for them to be out this far. Can you?"

 The droid gave a soft, electronic moan. "Agreed," Luke nodded. "But refusing the offer doesn't buy us anything at all. We'll just have to stay alert."

 Reaching into the other side pouch, he pulled out his blaster, checked its power level, and slid it into the holster pocket built into his flight suit. His comlink went into another pocket, though what use it would be aboard theWild Karrde he couldn't imagine. The emergency survival pack went around his waist, awkward to fasten in the cramped quarters. And last, he pulled out his lightsaber and fastened it to his belt.

 "Okay, X-wing, we've got the cylinder established," the voice came. "Whenever you're ready."

 TheWild Karrde 's small docking bay was directly above him, its outer door gaping invitingly. Luke checked his instruments, confirmed there was indeed a corridor of air between the two ships, and took a deep breath. "Here we go, Artoo," he said, and popped the canopy.

 A puff of breeze brushed across his face as the air pressures equalized. Giving himself a careful push, he eased up and out, gripping the edge of the canopy to turn himself around. Artoo, he saw, had ejected from his socket and was drifting freely just above the X-wing, making distinctly unhappy noises about his situation. "I've got you, Artoo," Luke soothed, reaching out with the Force to pull the droid toward him. Getting his bearings one last time, he bent his knees and pushed off.

 He reached the airlock at the back of the bay a half second ahead of Artoo, grabbed hold of the straps fastened to the walls, and brought both of them to a smooth halt. Someone was obviously watching; they were still moving when the outer lock door slid shut. Gravity came back, slowly enough for him to adjust his stance to it, and a moment later the inner door slid open.

 There was a young man waiting for them, wearing a casual coverall of an unfamiliar cut. "Welcome aboard theWild Karrde ," he said, nodding gravely. "If you'll follow me, the captain would like to see you."

 Without waiting for a reply, he turned and headed down the curving corridor. "Come on, Artoo," Luke murmured, starting after him and reaching out with the Force for a quick survey of the ship. Aside from their guide, he could sense only four others aboard, all of them in the forward sections. Behind him, in the aft sections...

 He shook his head, trying to clear it. It didn't help: the aft sections of the ship still remained oddly dark to him. An aftereffect of the long hibernation, probably. It was for certain, though, that there were no crew members or droids back there, and that was all he needed to know for the moment.

 The guide led them to a door, which slid open as he stepped to one side. "Captain Karrde will see you now," he said, waving toward the open door.

 "Thank you," Luke nodded to him. With Artoo bumping against his heels, he stepped into the room.

 It was an office of sorts; small, with much of its wall space taken up with what looked like highly sophisticated communications and encrypt equipment. In the center was a large desk/ console combination... and seated behind it, watching Luke's approach, was a slender man, thin-faced, with short dark hair and pale blue eyes.

 "Good evening," he said in a cool, carefully modulated voice. "I'm Talon Karrde." His eyes flicked up and down Luke, as if measuring him. "And you, I presume, are Commander Luke Skywalker."

 Luke stared at him. How in the worlds...? "Private citizen Skywalker," he said, striving to keep his own voice calm. "I resigned my Alliance commission nearly four years ago."

 An almost-smile twitched the corners of Karrde's mouth. "I stand corrected. I must say, you've certainly found a good place to get away from it all."

 The question was unstated, but no less obvious for that. "I had some help choosing it," Luke told him. "A small run-in with an Imperial Star Destroyer about half a light-year away."

 "Ah," Karrde said, without any surprise that Luke could see or sense. "Yes, the Empire is still quite active in this part of the galaxy. Growing more so, too, particularly of late." He cocked his head slightly to the side, his eyes never leaving Luke's face. "Though I presume you've already noticed that. Incidentally, it looks like we'll be able to take your ship in tow, after all. I'm having the cables rigged now."

 "Thank you," Luke said, feeling the skin on the back of his neck start to tingle. Whether a pirate or a smuggler, Karrde should certainly have reacted more strongly to the news that there was a Star Destroyer in the area. Unless, of course, he already had an understanding with the Imperials... "Allow me to thank you for the rescue, as well," he continued. "Artoo and I are lucky you happened along."

 "And Artoo is? Oh, of courseyour astromech droid." The blue eyes flicked down briefly. "You must be a formidable warrior indeed, Skywalkerescaping from an Imperial Star Destroyer is no mean trick. Though I imagine a man like yourself is accustomed to giving the Imperials trouble."

 "I don't see much front-line action anymore," Luke told him. "You haven't told me how you came to be out here, Captain. Or, for that matter, how you knew who I was."

 Another almost-smile. "With a lightsaber attached to your belt?" he asked wryly. "Come now. You were either Luke Skywalker, Jedi, or else someone with a taste for antiques and an insufferably high opinion of his swordsmanship." Again, the blue eyes flicked up and down Luke. "You're not really what I expected, somehow. Though I suppose that's not all that surprisingthe vast majority of Jedi lore has been so twisted by myth and ignorance that to get a clear picture is almost impossible."

 The warning bell in the back of Luke's mind began to ring louder. "You almost sound as if you were expecting to find me here," he said, easing his body into a combat stance and letting his senses reach out. All five of the crewers were still more or less where they'd been a few minutes earlier, farther up toward the forward part of the ship. None except Karrde himself was close enough to pose any kind of immediate threat.

 "As a matter of fact, we were," Karrde agreed calmly. "Though I can't actually take any of the credit for that. It was one of my associates, Mara Jade, who led us here." His head inclined slightly to his right. "She's on the bridge at the moment."

 He paused, obviously waiting. It could be a setup, Luke knew; but the suggestion that someone might actually have been able to sense his presence from light-years away was too intriguing to pass up. Keeping his overall awareness clear, Luke narrowed a portion of his mind to theWild Karrde 's bridge. At the helm was the young woman he'd spoken to earlier from the X-wing. Beside her, an older man was busy running a calculation through the nav computer. And sitting behind them

 The jolt of that mind shot through him like an electric current. "Yes, that's her," Karrde confirmed, almost offhandedly. "She hides it quite well, actuallythough not, I suppose, from a Jedi. It took me several months of careful observation to establish that it was you, and you personally, for whom she had these feelings."

 It took Luke another second to find his voice. Never before, not even from the Emperor, had he ever felt such a black and bitter hatred. "I've never met her before," he managed.

 "No?" Karrde shrugged. "A pity. I was rather hoping you'd be able to tell me why she feels this way. Ah, well." He got to his feet. "I suppose, then, there's nothing more for us to talk about for the moment... and let me say in advance that I'm very sorry it has to be this way."

 Reflexively, Luke's hand darted for his lightsaber. He'd barely begun the movement when the shock of a stun weapon coursed through him from behind.

 There were Jedi methods for fighting off unconsciousness. But they all took at least a split second of preparationa split second that Luke did not have. Dimly, he felt himself falling; heard Artoo's frantic trilling in the distance; and wondered with his last conscious thought how in the worlds Karrde had done this to him.

 

 Chapter 19

 He awoke slowly, in stages, aware of nothing but the twin facts that, one, he was lying flat on his back and, two, he felt terrible.

 Slowly, gradually, the haze began to coalesce into more localized sensations. The air around him was warm but damp, a light and shifting breeze carrying several unfamiliar odors along with it. The surface beneath him had the soft/firm feel of a bed; the general sense of his skin and mouth implied he'd been asleep for probably several days.

 It took another minute for the implications of that to percolate through the mental fog filling his brain. More than an hour or two was well beyond the safe capabilities of any stun weapon he'd ever heard of. Clearly, after being shot, he'd been drugged.

 Inwardly, he smiled. Karrde was probably expecting him to be incapacitated for a while longer; and Karrde was in for a surprise. Forcing his mind into focus, he ran through the Jedi technique for detoxifying poisons and then waited for the haze to clear.

 It took him some time to realize that nothing was, in fact, happening.

 Somewhere in there he fell asleep again; and when he next awoke, his mind had cleared completely. Blinking against the sunlight streaming across his face, he opened his eyes and lifted his head.

 He was lying on a bed, still in his flight suit, in a small but comfortably furnished room. Directly across from him was an open window, the source of the aroma-laden breezes he'd already noted. Through the window, too, he could see the edge of a forest fifty meters or so away, above which a yellowish-orange sun hoveredrising or setting, he didn't know which. The furnishings of the room itself didn't look much like those of a prison cell

 "Finally awake, are you?" a woman's voice said from the side.

 Startled, Luke twisted his head toward the voice. His first, instantaneous thought was that he had somehow missed sensing whoever was over there; his second, following on the heels of the first, was that that was clearly ridiculous and that the voice must be coming instead from an intercom or comlink.

 He finished his turn, to discover that the first thought had indeed been correct.

 She was sitting in a high-backed chair, her arms draped loosely over the arms in a posture that seemed strangely familiar: a slender woman about Luke's own age, with brilliant red-gold hair and equally brilliant green eyes. Her legs were casually crossed; a compact but wicked-looking blaster lay on her lap.

 A genuine, living human being... and yet, impossibly, he couldn't sense her.

 The confusion must have shown in his face. "That's right," she said, favoring him with a smile. Not a friendly or even a polite smile, but one that seemed to be made up of equal parts bitterness and malicious amusement. "Welcome back to the world of mere mortals."

 and with a surge of adrenaline, Luke realized that the strange mental veiling wasn't limited to just her. He couldn't senseanything . Not people, not droids, not even the forest beyond his window.

 It was like suddenly going blind.

 "Don't like it, do you?" the woman mocked. "It's not easy to suddenly lose everything that once made you special, is it?"

 Slowly, carefully, Luke eased his legs over the side of the bed and sat up, giving his body plenty of time to get used to moving again. The woman watched him, her right hand dropping to her lap to rest on top of the blaster. "If the purpose of all this activity is to impress me with your remarkable powers of recuperation," she offered, "you don't need to bother."

 "Nothing so devious," Luke advised, breathing hard and trying not to wheeze. "The purpose of all this activity is to get me back on my feet." He looked her hard in the eye, wondering if she would flinch away from his gaze. She didn't even twitch. "Don't tell me; let me guess. You're Mara Jade."

 "That doesn't impress me, either," she said coldly. "Karrde already told me he'd mentioned my name to you."

 Luke nodded. "He also told me that you were the one who found my X-wing. Thank you."

 Her eyes flashed. "Save your gratitude," she bit out. "As far as I'm concerned, the only question left is whether we turn you over to the Imperials or kill you ourselves."

 Abruptly she stood up, the blaster ready in her hand. "On your feet. Karrde wants to see you."

 Carefully, Luke stood up, and as he did so, he noticed for the first time that Mara had attached his lightsaber to her own belt. Was she, then, a Jedi herself? Powerful enough, perhaps, to smother Luke's abilities? "I can't say that either of those options sounds appealing," he commented.

 "There's one other one." She took half a step forward, moving close enough that he could have reached out and touched her. Lifting the blaster, she pointed it directly at his face. "You try to escape... and I kill you right here and now."

 For a long moment they stood there, frozen. The bitter hatred was blazing again in those eyes... but even as Luke gazed back at her, he saw something else along with the anger. Something that looked like a deep and lingering pain.

 He stood quietly, not moving; and almost reluctantly, she lowered the weapon. "Move. Karrde's waiting."

 

 Luke's room was at the end of a long hallway with identical doors spaced at regular intervals along its length. A barracks of sorts, he decided, as they left it and started across a grassy clearing toward a large, high-roofed building. Several other structures clustered around the latter, including another barracks building, a handful that looked like storehouses, and one that was clearly a servicing hangar. Grouped around the hangar on both sides were over a dozen starships, including at least two bulk cruisers like theWild Karrde and several smaller craft, some of them hidden a ways back into the forest that pressed closely in on the compound from all sides. Tucked away behind one of the bulk cruisers, he could just see the nose of his X-wing. For a moment he considered asking Mara what had happened to Artoo, decided he'd do better to save the question for Karrde.

 They reached the large central building and Mara reached past Luke to slap the sensor plate beside the door. "He's in the greatroom," Mara said as the panel slid open in response. "Straight ahead."

 They walked down a long hallway, passing a pair of what seemed to be medium-sized dining and recreation rooms. Ahead, a large door at the end of the hallway slid open at their approach. Mara ushered him inside

 And into a scene straight out of ancient legend.

 For a moment Luke just stood in the doorway, staring. The room was large and spacious, its high ceiling translucent and crisscrossed by a webwork of carved rafters. The walls were composed of a dark brown wood, much of it elaborately open-mesh carved, with a deep blue light glowing through the interstices. Other luxuries were scattered sparingly about: a small sculpture here, an unrecognizable alien artifact there. Chairs, couches, and large cushions were arranged in well-separated conversation circles, giving a distinctly relaxed, almost informal air to the place.

 But all that was secondary, taken in peripherally or at a later time entirely. For that first astonishing moment Luke's full attention was fixed solidly on the tree growing through the center of the room.

 Not a small tree, either, like the delicate saplings that lined one of the hallways in the Imperial Palace. This one was huge, a meter in diameter at the base, extending from a section of plain dirt floor through the translucent ceiling and far beyond. Thick limbs starting perhaps two meters from the ground stretched their way across the room, some of them nearly touching the walls, almost like arms reaching out to encompass everything in sight.

 "Ah; Skywalker," a voice called from in front of him. With an effort, Luke shifted his gaze downward, to find Karrde sitting comfortably in a chair at the base of the tree. On either side two long-legged quadrupeds crouched, their vaguely doglike muzzles pointing stiffly in Luke's direction. "Come and join me."

 Swallowing, Luke started toward him. There were stories he remembered from his childhood about fortresses with trees growing up through them. Frightening stories, some of them, full of danger and helplessness and fear.

 And in every one of those stories, such fortresses were the home of evil.

 "Welcome back to the land of the living," Karrde said as Luke approached. He picked up a silvery pitcher from the low table at his side, poured a reddish liquid into a pair of cups. "I must apologize for having kept you asleep all this time. But I'm sure you appreciate the special problems involved in making sure a Jedi stays where you've put him."

 "Of course," Luke said, his attention on the two animals beside Karrde's chair. They were still staring at him with an uncomfortable intensity. "Though if you'd just asked nicely," he added, "you might have found me quite willing to cooperate."

 A flicker of a smile touched Karrde's lips. "Perhaps. Perhaps not." He gestured to the chair across from him. "Please sit down."

 Luke started forward; but as he did so, one of the animals rose up slightly on his haunches, making a strange sort of choked purr. "Easy, Sturm," Karrde admonished, looking down at the animal. "This man is our guest."

 The creature ignored him, its full attention clearly on Luke. "I don't think it believes you," Luke suggested carefully. Even as he spoke, the second animal made the same sort of sound as the first had.

 "Perhaps not." Karrde had a light grip on each of the animals' collars now and was glancing around the room. "Chin!" he called toward the three men lounging in one of the conversation circles. "Come and take them out, will you?"

 "Sure." A middle-aged man with a Froffli-style haircut got up and trotted over. "Come on, fellows," he grunted, taking over Karrde's grip on the collars and leading the animals away. "What hai we go for a walk, hee?"

 "My apologies, Skywalker," Karrde said, frowning slightly as he watched the others go. "They're usually better behaved than that with guests. Now; please sit down."

 Luke did so, accepting the cup Karrde offered him. Mara stepped past him and took up position next to her chief. Her blaster, Luke noted, was now in a wrist holster on her left forearm, nearly as accessible as it would have been in her hand.

 "It's just a mild stimulant," Karrde said, nodding to the cup in Luke's hand. "Something to help you wake up." He took a drink from his own cup and set it back down on the low table.

 Luke took a sip. It tasted all right; and anyway, if Karrde had wanted to drug him, there was hardly any need to stoop to such a childish subterfuge. "Would you mind telling me where my droid is?"

 "Oh, he's perfectly all right," Karrde assured him. "I have him in one of my equipment sheds for safekeeping."

 "I'd like to see him, if I may."

 "I'm sure that can be arranged. But later." Karrde leaned back in his seat, his forehead furrowing slightly. "Perhaps after we've figured out just exactly what we're going to do with you."

 Luke glanced up at Mara. "Your associate mentioned the possibilities. I'd hoped I could add another to the list."

 "That we send you back home?" Karrde suggested.

 "With due compensation, of course," Luke assured him. "Say, double whatever the Empire would offer?"

 "You're very generous with other people's money," Karrde said dryly. "The problem, unfortunately, doesn't arise from money, but from politics. Our operations, you see, extend rather deeply into both Imperial and Republic space. If the Empire discovered we'd released you back to the Republic, they would be highly displeased with us."

 "And vice versa if you turned me over to the Empire," Luke pointed out.

 "True," Karrde said. "Except that given the damage to your X-wing's subspace radio, the Republic presumably has no idea what happened to you. The Empire, unfortunately, does."

 "And it's not what theywould offer," Mara put in. "It's what theyhave offered. Thirty thousand."

 Luke pursed his lips. "I had no idea I was so valuable," he said.

 "You could be the difference between solvency and failure for any number of marginal operators," Karrde said bluntly. "There are probably dozens of ships out there right now, ignoring schedules and prior commitments to hunt for you." He smiled tightly. "Operators who haven't given even a moment of consideration to how they would hold onto a Jedi even if they caught one

 "Your method seems to work pretty well," Luke told him. "I don't suppose you'd be willing to tell me how you've managed it."

 Karrde smiled again. "Secrets of that magnitude are worth a great deal of money. Have you any secrets of equal value to trade?"

 "Probably not," Luke said evenly. "But, again, I'm sure the New Republic would be willing to pay market value."

 Karrde sipped from his drink, eyeing Luke thoughtfully over the rim of the cup. "I'll make you a deal," he said, putting the cup back on the table beside him. "You tell me why the Empire is suddenly so interested in you, and I'll tell you why your Jedi powers aren't working."

 "Why don't you ask the Imperials directly?"

 Karrde smiled. "Thank you, but no. I'd just as soon not have them start wondering at my sudden interest. Particularly after we pleaded prior commitments when the request came in for us to help hunt you down."

 Luke frowned at him. "You weren't hunting for me?"

 "No, we weren't." Karrde's lip twisted. "One of those little ironies that make life so interesting. We were simply returning from a cargo pickup when Mara dropped us out of hyperspace on the spur of the moment to do a nav reading."

 Luke studied Mara's stony expression. "How fortunate for you," he said.

 "Perhaps," Karrde said. "The net result, though, was to put us in the middle of the exact situation that I'd hoped to avoid."

 Luke held his hands out, palms upward. "Then let me go and pretend none of this happened. I give you my word I'll keep your part in it quiet."

 "The Empire would find out anyway," Karrde shook his head. "Their new commander is extremely good at piecing bits of information together. No, I think your best hope right now is for us to find a compromise. Some way we can let you go while still giving the Imperials what they want." He cocked his head slightly. "Which leads us back to my original question."

 "And from there back to my original answer," Luke said. "I reallydon't know what the Empire wants with me." He hesitated, but Leia should be well beyond Imperial reach by now. "I can tell you, though, that it's not just me. There have been two attempts on my sister Leia, too."

 "Killing attempts?"

 Luke thought about it. "I don't think so. The one I was present for felt more like a kidnapping."

 "Interesting," Karrde murmured, his eyes defocusing slightly. "Leia Organa Solo. Who is in training to be a Jedi like her brother. That could explain... certain recent Imperial actions."

 Luke waited, but after a moment it became clear that Karrde wasn't going to elaborate. "You spoke of a compromise," he reminded the other.

 Karrde seemed to pull his thoughts back to the room. "Yes, I did," he said. "It's occurred to me that your privileged position in the New Republic might be what the Empire was interested inthat they wanted information on the inner workings of the Provisional Council. In such a case, we might have been able to work out a deal whereby you went free while your R2 droid went to the Imperials for debriefing."

 Luke felt his stomach tighten. "It wouldn't do them any good," he said as casually as he could manage. The thought of Artoo being sold into Imperial slavery... "Artoo has never been to any of the Council meetings."

 "But he does have a great deal of knowledge of you personally," Karrde pointed out. "As well as of your sister, her husband, and various other highly placed members of the New Republic." He shrugged. "It's a moot question now, of course. The fact that the focus is exclusively on the New Republic's Jedi and potential Jedi means they're not simply after information. Where did these two attacks take place?"

 "The first was on Bimmisaari, the second on Bpfassh."

 Karrde nodded. "We've got a contact on Bpfassh; perhaps we can get him to do some backtracking on the Imperials. Until then, I'm afraid you'll have to remain here as our guest."

 It sounded like a dismissal. "Let me just point out one other thing before I go," Luke said. "No matter what happens to meor what happens to Leia, for that matterthe Empire is still doomed. There are more planets in the New Republic now than there are under Imperial rule, and that number increases daily. We'll win eventually, if only by sheer weight of numbers."

 "I understand that was the Emperor's own argument when discussing your Rebellion," Karrde countered dryly. "Still, thatis the crux of the dilemma, isn't it? While the Empire will wreak swift retribution on me if I don't give you over to them, the New Republic looks more likely to win out in the long run."

 "Only if he and his sister are there to hold Mon Mothma's hand," Mara put in contemptuously. "If they aren't

 "If they aren't, the final time frame is somewhat less clear," Karrde agreed. "At any rate, I thank you for your time, Skywalker. I hope we can come to a decision without too much of a delay."

 "Don't hurry on my account," Luke told him. "This seems a pleasant enough world to spend a few days on."

 "Don't believe it for a moment," Karrde warned. "My two pet vornskrs have a large number of relatives out in the forest. Relatives who haven't had the benefits of modern domestication."

 "I understand," Luke said. On the other hand, if he could get out of Karrde's encampment and clear of whatever this strange interference was they were using on him...

 "And don't count on your Jedi skills to protect you, either," Karrde added, almost lazily. "You'll be just as helpless in the forest. Probably more so." He looked up at the tree towering above him. "There are, after all, considerably more ysalamiri out there than there are here."

 "Ysalamiri?" Luke followed his gesture... and for the first time noticed the slender, gray-brown creature hanging onto the tree limb directly over Karrde's head. "What is it?"

 "The reason you're staying where we put you," Karrde said. "They seem to have the unusual ability to push back the Forceto create bubbles, so to speak, where the Force simply doesn't exist."

 "I've never heard of them," Luke said, wondering if there was any truth at all to the story. Certainly neither Yoda nor Ben had ever mentioned the possibility of such a thing.

 "Not very many have," Karrde agreed. "And in the past, most of those who did had a vested interest in keeping it that way. The Jedi of the Old Republic avoided the planet, for obvious reasons, which was why a fair number of smuggling groups back then had their bases here. After the Emperor destroyed the Jedi, most of the groups pulled up roots and left, preferring to be closer to their potential markets. Now that the Jedi are rising again" he nodded gravely to Luke "perhaps some of them will return. Though I dare say the general populace would probably not appreciate that."

 Luke glanced around the tree. Now that he knew what to look for, he could see several other ysalamiri wrapped around and across various of the limbs and branches. "What makes you think it's the ysalamiri and not something else that's responsible for this bubbling in the Force?"

 "Partly local legend," Karrde said. "Mainly, the fact that you're standing here talking with me. How else could a man with a stun weapon and an extremely nervous mind have walked right up behind a Jedi without being noticed?"

 Luke looked at him sharply, the last piece falling into place. "You had ysalamiri aboard theWild Karrde ."

 "Correct," Karrde said. "Purely by chance, actually. Well" He looked up at Mara. "Perhaps notentirely by chance."

 Luke glanced again at the ysalamir above Karrde's head. "How far does this bubbling extend?"

 "Actually, I'm not sure anyone knows," Karrde conceded. "Legend says that individual ysalamiri have bubbles from one to ten meters in radius, but that groups of them together have considerably larger ones. Some sort of reinforcement, I gather. Perhaps you'll do us the courtesy of participating in a few experiments regarding them before you leave."

 "Perhaps," Luke said. "Though that probably depends on which direction I'm headed at the time."

 "It probably will," Karrde agreed. "Well. I imagine you'd like to get cleaned upyou've been living in that flight suit for several days now. Did you bring any changes of clothing with you?"

 "There's a small case in the cargo compartment of my X-wing," Luke told him. "Thank you for bringing it along, incidentally."

 "I try never to waste anything that may someday prove useful," Karrde said. "I'll have your things sent over as soon as my associates have determined that there are no hidden weapons or other equipment among them." He smiled slightly. "I doubt that a Jedi would bother with such things, but I believe in being thorough. Good evening, Skywalker."

 Mara had her tiny blaster in hand again. "Let's go," she said, gesturing with the weapon.

 Luke stood up. "Let me offer you one other option," he said to Karrde. "If you decide you'd rather pretend none of this ever happened, you could just return Artoo and me to where you found us. I'd be willing to take my chances with the other searchers."

 "Including the Imperials?" Karrde asked.

 "Including the Imperials," Luke nodded.

 A small smile touched Karrde's lips. "You might be surprised. But I'll keep the option in mind."

 

 The sun had disappeared behind the trees and the sky was noticeably darker as Mara escorted him back across the compound. "Did I miss dinner?" he asked as they walked down the corridor toward his room.

 "Something can be brought to you," Mara said, her voice little more than a thinly veiled snarl.

 "Thank you." Luke took a careful breath. "I don't know why you dislike me so much"

 "Shut up," she cut him off. "Just shut up."

 Grimacing, Luke did so. They reached his room and she nudged him inside. "We don't have any lock for the window," she said, "but there's an alarm on it. You try going out, and it'll be a toss-up as to whether the vornskrs get to you before I do." She smiled, mock-sweetly. "But don't take my word for it. Try it and find out."

 Luke looked at the window, then back at Mara. "I'll pass, thanks."

 Without another word she left the room, closing the door behind her. There was the click of an electronic lock being engaged, and then silence.

 He went to the window, peered out. There were lights showing in some of the other barracks windows, though he hadn't noticed any other lights in his own building. Which made sense, he supposed. Whether Karrde decided to turn him over to the Empire or release him back to the New Republic, there was no point in more of his associates knowing about it than absolutely necessary.

 All the more so if Karrde decided to take Mara's advice and just kill him.

 He turned away from the window and went back to his bed, fighting back the fear trying to rise inside him. Never since facing the Emperor had he felt so helpless.

 Or, for that matter, actuallybeen so helpless.

 He took a deep breath.For the Jedi, there is no emotion; there is peace. Somehow, he knew, there had to be a way out of this prison.

 All he had to do was to stay alive long enough to find it.

 

 Chapter 20

 "No, I assure you, everything is fine," Threepio said in Leia's voice, looking just about as unhappy beneath his headset as a droid could possibly look. "Han and I decided that as long as we were out this way we might as well take a look around the Abregado system."

 "I understand, Your Highness," Winter's voice came back over theFalcon' s speaker. To Han, she sounded tired. Tired, and more than a little tense. "May I recommend, though, that you don't stay away too much longer."

 Threepio looked helplessly at Han. "We'll be back soon," Han muttered into his comlink.

 "We'll be back soon," Threepio echoed into theFalcon 's mike.

 "I just want to check out"

 "I just want to check out"

 "the Gados's"

 "the Gados's"

 "manufacturing infrastructure."

 "manufacturing infrastructure."

 "Yes, Your Highness," Winter said. "I'll pass that information on to the Council. I'm sure they'll be pleased to hear it." She paused, just noticeably. "I wonder if I might be permitted to speak with Captain Solo for a moment."

 Across the cockpit, Lando grimaced.She knows, he mouthed silently.

 No kidding,Han mouthed back. He caught Threepio's eye and nodded. "Of course," the droid said, sagging with obvious relief. "Han?"

 Han switched his comlink over. "I'm here, Winter. What's up?"

 "I wanted to know if you had any idea yet when you and Princess Leia would be returning," she said. "Admiral Ackbar, particularly, has been asking about you."

 Han frowned at the comlink. Ackbar probably hadn't spoken two words to him outside of official business since he'd resigned his general's commission a few months back. "You'll have to thank the Admiral for his interest," he told Winter, picking his words carefully. "I trust he's doing all right himself?"

 "About as usual," Winter said. "He's having some problems with his family, though, now that school is in full swing."

 "A little squabbling among the children?" Han suggested.

 "Bedtime arguments, mainly," she said. "Problems with the little one over who's going to get to stay up and readthat sort of thing. You understand."

 "Yeah," Han said. "I know the kids pretty well. How about the neighbors? He still having trouble with them?"

 There was a brief pause. "I'm... not exactly sure," she said. "He hasn't mentioned anything about them to me. I can ask, if you'd like."

 "It's no big deal," Han said. "As long as the family's doing okaythat's the important thing."

 "I agree. At any rate, I think he mainly just wanted to be remembered to you."

 "Thanks for passing on the message." He threw Lando a look. "Go ahead and tell him that we won't be out here too much longer. We'll go to Abregado and maybe look in on a couple of others and then head back."

 "All right," Winter said. "Anything else?"

 "Noyes," Han corrected himself. "What's the latest on the Bpfasshi recovery program?"

 "Those three systems the Imperials hit?"

 "Right." And where he and Leia had had their second brush with those gray-skinned alien kidnappers; but there was no point in dwelling on that.

 "Let me call up the proper file," Winter said. "...It's coming along reasonably well. There were some problems with supply shipments, but the material seems to be moving well enough now."

 Han frowned at the speaker. "What did Ackbar do, dig up some mothballed container ships from somewhere?"

 "Actually, he made his own," Winter came back dryly. "He's taken some capital shipsStar Cruisers and Attack Frigates, mostlycut the crews back to skeleton size and put in extra droids, and turned them into cargo ships."

 Han grimaced. "I hope he's got some good escorts along with them. Empty Star Cruisers would make great target practice for the Imperials."

 "I'm sure he's thought of that," Winter assured him. "And the orbit dock and shipyards at Sluis Van are very well defended."

 "I'm not sure anything's really well defended these days," Han returned sourly. "Not with the Imperials running loose like they are. Anyway. Got to go; talk to you later."

 "Enjoy your trip. Your Highness? Good-bye."

 Lando snapped his fingers at Threepio. "Good-bye, Winter," the droid said.

 Han made a slashing motion across his throat, and Lando shut off the transmitter. "If those Star Cruisers had been built with proper slave circuits, they wouldn't have to load them with droids to make container ships out of them," he pointed out innocently.

 "Yeah," Han nodded, his mind just barely registering Lando's words. "Come onwe've got to cut this short and get back." He climbed out of the cockpit seat and checked his blaster. "Something's about to burn through on Coruscant."

 "You mean all that stuff about Ackbar's family?" Lando asked, standing up.

 "Right," Han said, heading back toward theFalcon's hatchway. "If I'm reading Winter right, it sounds like Fey'lya has started a major push toward Ackbar's territory. Come on, Threepioyou need to lock up behind us."

 "Captain Solo, I must once again protest this whole arrangement," the droid said plaintively, scuttling up behind Han. "I really feel that to impersonate Princess Leia"

 "All right, all right," Han cut him off. "As soon as we get back, I'll have Lando undo the programming."

 "It's over already?" Lando asked, pushing past Threepio to join Han at the lock. "I thought you told Winter"

 "That was for the benefit of anyone tapping in," Han said. "As soon as we've worked through this contact, we're going to head back. Maybe even stop by Kashyyyk on the way and pick up Leia."

 Lando whistled softly. "That bad, huh?"

 "It's hard to say, exactly," Han had to admit as he slapped the release. The ramp dropped smoothly down to the dusty permcrete beneath them. "That 'staying up late to read' is the part I don't understand. I suppose it could mean some of the intelligence work that Ackbar's been doing along with the Supreme Commander position. Or worsemaybe Fey'lya's going for the whole sabacc pot."

 "You and Winter should have worked out a better verbal code," Lando said as they started down the ramp.

 "We should have worked out a verbal code, period," Han growled back. "I've been meaning for three years to sit down with her and Leia and set one up. Never got around to it."

 "Well, if it helps, the analysis makes sense," Lando offered, glancing around the docking pit. "It fits the rumors I've heard, anyway. I take it the neighbors you referred to are the Empire?"

 "Right. Winter should have heard something about it if Ackbar had had any luck plugging the security leaks."

 "Won't that make it dangerous to go back, then?" Lando asked as they started toward the exit.

 "Yeah," Han agreed, feeling his lip twist. "But we're going to have to risk it. Without Leia there to play peacemaker, Fey'lya might just be able to beg or bully the rest of the Council into giving him whatever it is he wants."

 "Mmm." Lando paused at the bottom of the ramp leading to the docking pit exit and looked up. "Let's hope this is the last contact in the line."

 "Let's hope first that the guy shows," Han countered, heading up the ramp.

 The Abregado-rae Spaceport had had a terrible reputation among the pilots Han had flown with in his smuggling days, ranking right down at the bottom with places like the Mos Eisley port on Tatooine. It was therefore something of a shock, though a pleasant one, to find a bright, clean cityscape waiting for them when they stepped through the landing pit door. "Well, well," Lando murmured from beside him. "Has civilization finally come to Abregado?"

 "Stranger things have happened," Han agreed, looking around. Clean and almost painfully neat, yet with that same unmistakable air that every general freight port seemed to have. That air of the not-entirely tame...

 "Uh-oh," Lando said quietly, his eyes on something past Han's shoulder. "Looks like someone's just bought the heavy end of the hammer."

 Han turned. Fifty meters down the port perimeter street, a small group of uniformed men with light-armor vests and blaster rifles had gathered at one of the other landing pit entrances. Even as Han watched, half of them slipped inside, leaving the rest on guard in the street. "That's the hammer, all right," Han agreed, craning his neck to try and read the number above the door. Sixty-three. "Let's hope that's not our contact in there. Where are we meeting him, anyway?"

 "Right over there," Lando said, pointing to a small windowless building built in the gap between two much older ones. A carved wooden plank with the single word "LoBue" hung over the door. "We're supposed to take one of the tables near the bar and the casino area and wait. He'll contact us there."

 The LoBue was surprisingly large, given its modest street front, extending both back from the street and also into the older building to its left. Just inside the entrance were a group of conversation-oriented tables overlooking a small but elaborate dance floor, the latter deserted but with some annoying variety of taped music playing in the background. On the far side of the dance floor were a group of private booths, too dark for Han to see into. Off to the left, up a few steps and separated from the dance floor by a transparent etched plastic wall, was the casino area. "I think I see the bar up there," Lando murmured. "Just back of the sabacc tables to the left. That's probably where he wants us."

 "You ever been here before?" Han asked over his shoulder as they skirted the conversation tables and headed up the steps.

 "Not this place, no. Last time I was at Abregado-rae was years ago. It was worse than Mos Eisley, and I didn't stay long." Lando shook his head. "Whatever problems you might have with the new government here, you have to admit they've done a good job of cleaning the planet up."

 "Yeah, well, whatever problems you have with the new government, let's keep them quiet, okay?" Han warned. "Just for once, I'd like to keep a low profile."

 Lando chuckled. "Whatever you say."

 The lighting in the bar area was lower than that in the casino proper, but not so low that seeing was difficult. Choosing a table near the gaming tables, they sat down. A holo of an attractive girl rose from the center of the table as they did so. "Good day, gentles," she said in pleasantly accented Basic. "How may I serve?"

 "Do you have any Necr'ygor Omic wine?" Lando asked.

 "We do, indeed: '47, '49, '50, and '52."

 "We'll have a half carafe of the '49," Lando told her.

 "Thank you, gentles," she said, and the holo vanished.

 "Was that part of the countersign?" Han asked, letting his gaze drift around the casino. It was only the middle of the afternoon, local time, but even so over half the tables were occupied. The bar area, in contrast, was nearly empty, with only a handful of humans and aliens scattered around. Drinking, apparently, ranked much lower than gambling on the list of popular Gado vices.

 "Actually, he didn't say anything about what we should order," Lando said. "But since I happen to like a good Necr'ygor Omic wine"

 "And since Coruscant will be picking up the tab for it?"

 "Something like that."

 The wine arrived on a tray delivered through a slidehatch in the center of the table. "Will there be anything else, gentles?" the holo girl asked.

 Lando shook his head, picking up the carafe and the two glasses that had come with it. "Not right now, thank you."

 "Thank you." She and the tray disappeared.

 "So," Lando said, pouring the wine. "I guess we wait."

 "Well, while you're busy waiting, do a casual one-eighty," Han said. "Third sabacc table backfive men and a woman. Tell me if the guy second from the right is who I think it is."

 Lifting his wine glass, Lando held it up to the light, as if studying its color. In the process he turned halfway around "Not Fynn Torve?"

 "Sure looks like him to me," Han agreed. "I figured you'd probably seen him more recently than I have."

 "Not since the last Kessel run you and I did together." Lando cocked an eyebrow at Han. "Just before thatother big sabacc table," he added dryly.

 Han gave him an injured look. "You're not still sore about theFalcon , are you?"

 "Now..." Lando considered. "No, probably not. No sorer than I was at losing the game to an amateur like you in the first place."

 "Amateur?"

 "but I'll admit there were times right afterward when I lay awake at night plotting elaborate revenge. Good thing I never got around to doing any of it."

 Han looked back at the sabacc table. "If it makes you feel any better... if you hadn't lost theFalcon to me, we probably wouldn't be sitting here right now. The Empire's first Death Star would have taken out Yavin and then picked the Alliance apart planet by planet. And that would have been the end of it."

 Lando shrugged. "Maybe; maybe not. With people like Ackbar and Leia running things"

 "Leia would have been dead," Han cut him off. "She was already slated for execution when Luke, Chewie, and I pulled her out of the Death Star." A shiver ran through him at the memory. He'd beenthat close to losing her forever. And would never even have known what he'd missed.

 And now that he knew... he might still lose her.

 "She'll be okay, Han," Lando said quietly. "Don't worry." He shook his head. "I just wish we knew what the Imperials wanted with her."

 "I know what they want," Han growled. "They want the twins."

 Lando stared at him, a startled look on his face. "Are you sure?"

 "As sure as I am of any of this," Han said. "Why else didn't they just use stun weapons on us in that Bpfassh ambush? Because the things have a better than fifty-fifty chance of sparking a miscarriage, that's why."

 "Sounds reasonable," Lando agreed grimly. "Does Leia know?"

 "I don't know. Probably."

 He looked at the sabacc tables, the cheerful decadence of the whole scene suddenly grating against his mood. If Torve really was Karrde's contact man, he wished the other would quit this nonsense and get on with it. It wasn't like there were a lot of possibilities hanging around here to choose from.

 His eyes drifted away from the casino, into the bar area... and stopped. There, sitting at a shadowy table at the far end, were three men.

 There was an unmistakable air about a general freight port, a combination of sounds and smells and vibrations that every pilot who'd been in the business long enough knew instantly. There was an equally unmistakable air about planetary security officers. "Uh-oh," he muttered.

 "What?" Lando asked, throwing a casual glance of his own around the room. The glance reached the far table "Uh-oh, indeed," he agreed soberly. "Offhand, I'd say that explains why Torve's hiding at a sabacc table."

 "And doing his best to ignore us," Han said, watching the security agents out of the corner of his eye and trying to gauge the focus of their attention. If they'd tumbled to this whole contact meeting there probably wasn't much he could do about it, short of hauling out his New Republic ID and trying to pull rank on them. Which might or might not work; and he could just hear the polite screaming fit Fey'lya would have over it either way.

 But if they were just after Torve, maybe as part of that landing pit raid he and Lando had seen on the way in...

 It was worth the gamble. Reaching over, he tapped the center of the table. "Attendant?"

 The holo reappeared. "Yes, gentles?"

 "Give me twenty sabacc chips, will you?"

 "Certainly," she said, and vanished.

 "Wait a minute," Lando said cautiously as Han drained his glass. "You're not going to go over there, are you?"

 "You got a better idea?" Han countered, reaching down to resettle his blaster in its holster. "If he's our contact, I sure don't want to lose him now."

 Lando gave a sigh of resignation. "So much for keeping a low profile. What do you want me to do?"

 "Be ready to run some interference." The center of the table opened up and a neat stack of sabacc chips arrived. "So far it looks like they're just watching himmaybe we can get him out of here before their pals arrive in force."

 "If not?"

 Han collected the chips and got to his feet. "Then I'll try to create a diversion, and meet you back at theFalcon ."

 "Right. Good luck."

 There were two seats not quite halfway across the sabacc table from Torve. Han chose one and sat down, dropping his stack of chips onto the table with a metallicthud . "Deal me in," he said.

 The others looked up at him, their expressions varying from surprised to annoyed. Torve himself glanced up, came back for another look. Han cocked an eyebrow at him. "You the dealer, sonny? Come on, deal me in."

 "Ahno, it's not my deal," Torve said, his eyes flicking to the pudgy man on his right.

 "And we've already started," the pudgy man said, his voice surly. "Wait until the next game."

 "What, you haven't all even bet yet," Han countered, gesturing toward the handful of chips in the hand pot. The sabacc pot, in contrast, was pretty richthe session must have been going for a couple of hours at least. Probably one reason the dealer didn't want fresh blood in the game who might conceivably win it all. "Come on, give me my cards," he told the other, tossing a chip into the hand pot.

 Slowly, glaring the whole time, the dealer peeled the top two cards off the deck and slid them over. "That's more like it," Han said approvingly. "Brings back memories, this does. I used to drop the heavy end of the hammer on the guys back home all the time."

 Torve looked at him sharply, his expression freezing to stone. "Did you, now," he said, his voice deliberately casual. "Well, you're playing with the big boys here, not the little people. You may not find the sort of rewards you're used to."

 "I'm not exactly an amateur myself," Han said airily. The locals at the spaceport had been raiding landing pit sixty-three... "I've wonoh, probably sixty-three games in the last month alone."

 Another flicker of recognition crossed Torve's face. So itwas his landing pit. "Lot of rewards in numbers like that," he murmured, letting one hand drop beneath the level of the table. Han tensed, but the hand came back up empty. Torve's eyes flicked around the room once, lingering for a second on the table where Lando was sitting before turning back to Han. "You willing to put your money where your mouth is?"

 Han met his gaze evenly. "I'll meet anything you've got."

 Torve nodded slowly. "I may just take you up on it."

 "This is all very interesting, I'm sure," one of the other players spoke up. "Some of us would like to play cards, though."

 Torve raised his eyebrows at Han. "The bet's at four," he invited.

 Han glanced at his cards: the Mistress of Staves and the four of Coins. "Sure," he said, lifting six chips from his stack and dropping them into the hand pot. "I'll see the four, and raise you two." There was a rustle of air behind him

 "Cheater!" a deep voice bellowed in his ear.

 Han jumped and spun around, reaching reflexively toward his blaster, but even as he did so a large hand shot over his shoulder to snatch the two cards from his other hand. "You are acheater , sir," the voice bellowed again.

 "I don't know what you're talking about," Han said, craning his neck up to get a look at his assailant.

 He was almost sorry he had. Towering over him like a bushy-bearded thundercloud twice his own size, the man was glaring down at him with an expression that could only be described as enflamed with religious fervor. "You know full well what I'm talking about," the man said, biting out each word. "This card" he waved one of Han's cards "is askifter ."

 Han blinked. "It is not," he protested. A crowd was rapidly gathering around the table: casino security and other employees, curious onlookers, and probably a few who were hoping to see a little blood. "It's the same card I was dealt."

 "Oh, is it?" The man cupped the card in one massive hand, held it in front of Han's face, and touched the corner with a fingertip.

 The Mistress of Staves abruptly became the six of Sabres. The man tapped the corner again and it became the Moderation face card. And then the eight of Flasks... and then the Idiot face card... and then the Commander of Coins...

 "That's the card I was dealt," Han repeated, feeling sweat starting to collect under his collar. So much, indeed, for keeping a low profile. "If it's a skifter, it's not my fault."

 A short man with a hard-bitten face elbowed past the bearded man. "Keep your hands on the table," he ordered Han in a voice that matched his face. "Move aside, Reverendwe'll handle this."

 Reverend?Han looked up at the glowering thundercloud again, and this time he saw the black, crystal-embedded band nestled against the tufts of hair at the other's throat. "Reverend, huh?" he said with a sinking feeling. There were extreme religious groups all over the galaxy, he'd found, whose main passion in life seemed to be the elimination of all forms of gambling. And all forms of gamblers.

 "Hands on the table, I said," the security man snapped, reaching over to pluck the suspect card from the Reverend's hand. He glanced at it, tried it himself, and nodded. "Cute skifter, con," he said, giving Han what was probably his best scowl.

 "He must have palmed the card he was dealt," the Reverend put in. He hadn't budged from his place at Han's side. "Where is it, cheater?"

 "The card I was dealt is right there in your friend's hand," Han snapped back. "I don't need a skifter to win at sabacc. If I had one, it's because it was dealt to me."

 "Oh, really?" Without warning, the Reverend abruptly turned to face the pudgy sabacc dealer, still sitting at the table but almost lost in the hovering crowd. "Your cards, sir, if you don't mind," he said, holding out his hand.

 The other's jaw dropped. "What are you talking about? Why would I give someone else a skifter? Anyway, it's a house decksee?"

 "Well, there's one way to be sure, isn't there?" the Reverend said, reaching over to scoop up the deck. "And then youandyou" he leveled fingers at the dealer and Han "can be scanned to see who's hiding an extra card. I dare say that would settle the issue, wouldn't you, Kampl?" he added, looking down at the scowling security man.

 "Don't tell us our job, Reverend," Kampl growled. "Cyruget that scanner over here, will you?"

 The scanner was a small palm-fitting job, obviously designed for surreptitious operation. "That one first," Kampl ordered, pointing at Han.

 "Right." Expertly, the other circled Han with the instrument. "Nothing."

 The first touch of uncertainty cracked through Kampl's scowl. "Try it again."

 The other did so. "Still nothing. He's got a blaster, comlink, and ID, and that's it."

 For a long moment Kampl continued staring at Han. Then, reluctantly, he turned to the sabacc dealer. "I protest!" the dealer sputtered, pushing himself to his feet. "I'm a Class Double-A citizenyou have no right to put me through this sort oftotally unfounded accusation."

 "You do it here or down at the station," Kampl snarled. "Your choice."

 The dealer threw a look at Han that was pure venom, but he stood in stiff silence while the security tech scanned him down. "He's clean, too," the other reported, a slight frown on his face.

 "Scan around the floor," Kampl ordered. "See if someone ditched it."

 "And count the cards still in the deck," the Reverend spoke up.

 Kampl spun to face him. "For the last time"

 "Because if all we have here are the requisite seventy-six cards," the Reverend cut him off, his voice heavy with suspicion, "perhaps what we're really looking at is a fixed deck."

 Kampl jerked as if he'd been stung. "We don't fix decks in here," he insisted.

 "No?" the Reverend glared. "Not even when special people are sitting in on the game? People who might know to look for a special card when it comes up?"

 "That's ridiculous," Kampl snarled, taking a step toward him. "The LoBue is a respectable and perfectly legal establishment. None of these players has any connection with"

 "Hey!" the pudgy dealer said suddenly. "The guy who was sitting next to mewhere'd he go?"

 The Reverend snorted. "So. None of them has any connection with you, do they?"

 Someone swore violently and started pushing his way through the crowdone of the three planetary security types who'd been watching the table. Kampl watched him go, took a deep breath, and turned to glare at Han. "You want to tell me your partner's name?"

 "He wasn't my partner," Han said. "And I was not cheating. You want to make a formal accusation, take me down to the station and do it there. If you don't" he got to his feet, scooping up his remaining chips in the process "then I'm leaving."

 For a long moment he thought Kampl was going to call his bluff. But the other had no real evidence, and he knew it; and apparently he had better things to do than indulge in what would be really nothing more than petty harassment. "Sureget out of here," the other snarled. "Don't ever come back."

 "Don't worry," Han told him.

 The crowd was starting to dissolve, and he had no trouble making his way back to his table. Lando, not surprisingly, was long gone. Whatwas surprising was that he'd settled the bill before he had left.

 

 "That was quick," Lando greeted him from the top of theFalcon 's entry ramp. "I wasn't expecting them to turn you loose for at least an hour."

 "They didn't have much of a case," Han said, climbing up the ramp and slapping the hatch button. "I hope Torve didn't give you the slip."

 Lando shook his head. "He's waiting in the lounge." He raised his eyebrows. "And considers himself in our debt."

 "That could be useful," Han agreed, heading down the curved corridor.

 Torve was seated at the lounge holo board, three small data pads spread out in front of him. "Good to see you again, Torve," Han said as he stepped in.

 "You, too, Solo," the other said gravely, getting to his feet and offering Han his hand. "I've thanked Calrissian already, but I wanted to thank you, too. Both for the warning and for helping me get out of there. I'm in your debt."

 "No problem," Han waved the thanks away. "I take it thatis your ship in pit sixty-three?"

 "My employer's ship, yes," Torve said, grimacing. "Fortunately, there's nothing contraband in it at the momentI've already off-loaded. They obviously suspect me, though."

 "What kind of contraband were you running?" Lando asked, coming up behind Han. "If it's not a secret, that is?"

 Torve cocked an eyebrow. "No secret, but you're not going to believe it. I was running food."

 "You're right," Lando said. "I don't believe it."

 Torve nodded vaguely off to one side. "I didn't either, at first. Seems there's a clan of people living off in the southern hills who don't find much about the new government to appreciate."

 "Rebels?"

 "No, and that's what's strange about it," Torve said. "They're not rebelling or making trouble or even sitting on vital resources. They're simple people, and all they want is to be left alone to continue living that way. The government's apparently decided to make an example of them, and among other things has cut off all food and medical supplies going that way until they agree to fall into step like everyone else."

 "That sounds like this government," Lando agreed heavily. "Not much into regional autonomy of any kind."

 "Hence, we smuggle in food," Torve concluded. "Crazy business. Anyway, it's nice to see you two again. Nice to see you're still working together, too. So many teams have broken up over the past few years, especially since Jabba bought thereally heavy end of the hammer."

 Han exchanged glances with Lando. "Well, it's actually more like we'reback together," he corrected Torve. "We sort of wound up on the same side during the war. Up till then..."

 "Up till then I wanted to kill him," Lando explained helpfully. "No big deal, really."

 "Sure," Torve said guardedly, looking back and forth between them. "Let me guess: theFalcon , right? I remember hearing rumors that you stole it."

 Han looked at Lando, eyebrows raised."Stole it?"

 "Like I said, I was mad," Lando shrugged. "It wasn't an out-and-out theft, actually, though it came pretty close. I had a little semilegit clearinghouse for used ships at the time, and I ran short of money in a sabacc game Han and I were playing. I offered him his pick of any of my ships if he won." He threw Han a mock glare. "He wassupposed to go for one of the flashy chrome-plate yachts that had been collecting dust on the front row, not the freighter I'd been quietly upgrading on the side for myself."

 "You did a good job, too," Han said. "Though Chewie and I wound up pulling a lot of the stuff out and redoing it ourselves."

 "Nice," Lando growled. "Another crack like that and I may just take it back."

 "Chewie would probably take great exception to that," Han said. He fixed Torve with a hard look. "Of course, you knew all this already, didn't you."

 Torve grinned. "No offense, Solo. I like to feel out my customers before we do businessget an idea of whether I can expect 'em to play straight with me. People who lie about their history usually lie about the job, too."

 "I trust we passed?"

 "Like babes in the tall grass," Torve nodded, still grinning. "So. What can Talon Karrde do for you?"

 Han took a careful breath. Finally. Now all he had to worry about was fouling this up. "I want to offer Karrde a deal: the chance to work directly with the New Republic."

 Torve nodded. "I'd heard that you were going around trying to push that scheme with other smuggling groups. The general feeling is that you're trying to set them up for Ackbar to take down."

 "I'm not," Han assured him. "Ackbar's not exactly thrilled at the idea, but he's accepted it. We need to get more shipping capacity from somewhere, and smugglers are the logical supply to tap."

 Torve pursed his lips. "From what I've heard it sounds like an interesting offer. 'Course, I'm not the one who makes decisions like that."

 "So take us to Karrde," Lando suggested. "Let Han talk to him directly."

 "Sorry, but he's at the main base at the moment," Torve said, shaking his head. "I can't take you there."

 "Why not?"

 "Because we don't let strangers just flit in and out," Torve said patiently. "We don't have anything like the kind of massive, overbearing security Jabba had on Tatooine, for starters."

 "We're not exactly" Lando began.

 Han cut him off with a gesture. "All right, then," he said to Torve. "How are you going to get back there?"

 Torve opened his mouth, then closed it again. "I guess I'll have to figure out a way to get my ship out of impoundment, won't I?"

 "That'll take time," Han pointed out. "Besides which, you're known here. On the other hand, someone who showed up with the proper credentials could probably pry it loose before anyone knew what had happened."

 Torve cocked an eyebrow. "You, for instance?"

 Han shrugged. "I might be able to. After that thing at the LoBue I probably should lie low, too. But I'm sure I could set it up."

 "I'm sure," Torve said, heavily sardonic. "And the catch...?"

 "No catch," Han told him. "All I want in return is for you to let us give you a lift back to your base, and then have fifteen minutes to talk with Karrde."

 Torve gazed at him, his mouth tight. "I'll get in trouble if I do this. You know that."

 "We're not exactly random strangers," Lando reminded him. "Karrde met me once, and both Han and I kept major military secrets for the Alliance for years. We've got a good record of people being able to trust us."

 Torve looked at Lando. Looked again at Han. "I'll get in trouble," he repeated with a sigh. "But I guess I reallydo owe you. One condition, though: I do all the navigation on the way in, and set it up in a coded, erasable module. Whether you have to do the same thing on the way out will be up to Karrde."

 "Good enough," Han agreed. Paranoia was a common enough ailment among smugglers. Anyway, he had no particular interest in knowing where Karrde had set up shop. "When can we leave?"

 "As soon as you're ready." Torve nodded at the sabacc chips cupped in Han's hand. "Unless you want to go back to the LoBue and play those," he added.

 Han had forgotten he was still holding the chips. "Forget it," he growled, dropping the stack onto the holo board. "I try not to play sabacc when there are fanatics breathing down my neck."

 "Yes, the Reverend put on a good show, didn't he?" Torve agreed. "Don't know what we would have done without him."

 "Wait a minute," Lando put in. "Youknow him?"

 "Sure," Torve grinned. "He's my contact with the hill clan. He couldn't have made nearly so much fuss without a stranger like you there for him to pick on, though."

 "Why, that rotten" Han clamped his teeth together. "I suppose that washis skifter, huh?"

 "Sure was." Torve looked innocently at Han. "What are you complaining about? You got what you wantedI'm taking you to see Karrde. Right?"

 Han thought about it. Torve was right, of course. But still... "Right," he conceded. "So much for heroics, I guess."

 Torve snorted gently. "Tell me about it. Come on, let's get into your computer and start coding up a nav module."

 

 Chapter 21

 Mara stepped up to the comm room door, wondering uneasily what this sudden summons was all about. Karrde hadn't said, but there had been something in his voice that had set her old survival instincts tingling. Checking the tiny blaster hanging upside down in its sleeve sheath, she slapped at the door release.

 She'd expected to find at least two people already in the room: Karrde plus the comm room duty man plus whoever else had been called in on this. To her mild surprise, Karrde was alone. "Come in, Mara," he invited, looking up from his data pad. "Close the door behind you."

 She did so. "Trouble?" she asked.

 "A minor problem only," he assured her. "A bit of an awkward one, though. Fynn Torve just called to say he was on his way in... and he has guests. Former New Republic generals Lando Calrissian and Han Solo."

 Mara felt her stomach tighten. "What do they want?"

 Karrde shrugged fractionally. "Apparently, just to talk to me."

 For a second, Mara's thoughts flicked to Skywalker, still locked away in his barracks room across the compound. But, nothere was no way anyone in the New Republic could possibly know he was here. Most of Karrde's own people didn't know it, including the majority of those right here on Myrkr. "Did they bring their own ship?" she asked.

 "Theirs is the only one coming in, actually," Karrde nodded. "Torve's riding with them."

 Mara's eyes flicked to the comm equipment behind him. "A hostage?"

 Karrde shook his head. "I don't think so. He gave all the proper all-clear passwords. TheEtherway 's still on Abregadobeen impounded by the local authorities or some such. Apparently, Calrissian and Solo helped Torve avoid a similar fate."

 "Then thank them, have them put Torve down, and tell them to get off the planet," she said. "You didn't invite them here."

 "True," Karrde agreed, watching her closely. "On the other hand, Torve seems to think he's under a certain obligation to them."

 "Then let him pay it back on his own time."

 The skin around Karrde's eyes seemed to harden. "Torve is one of my associates," he said, his voice cold. "His debts are the organization's. You should know that by now."

 Mara's throat tightened as a sudden, horrible thought occurred to her. "You're not going to give Skywalker to them, are you?" she demanded.

 "Alive, you mean?" Karrde countered.

 For a long moment Mara just stared at him; at that small smile and those slightly heavy eyelids and the rest of that carefully constructed expression of complete disinterest in the matter. But it was all an act, and she knew it. He wanted to know why she hated Skywalker, all rightwanted it with as close to genuine passion as the man ever got.

 And as far as she was concerned, he could go right on wanting it. "I don't suppose it's occurred to you," she bit out, "that Solo and Calrissian might have engineered this whole thing, including theEtherway 's impoundment, as a way of finding this base."

 "It's occurred to me, yes," Karrde said. "I dismissed it as somewhat farfetched."

 "Of course," Mara said sardonically. "The great and noble Han Solo would never do something so devious, would he? You never answered my question."

 "About Skywalker? I thought I'd made it clear, Mara, that he stays here until I know why Grand Admiral Thrawn is so interested in acquiring him. At the very least, we need to know what he's worth, and to whom, before we can set a fair market price for him. I have some feelers out; with luck, we should know in a few more days."

 "And meanwhile, his allies will be here in a few more minutes."

 "Yes," Karrde agreed, his lips puckering slightly. "Skywalker will have to be moved somewhere a bit more out of the waywe obviously can't risk Solo and Calrissian stumbling over him. I want you to move him to the number four storage shed."

 "That's where we're keeping that droid of his," Mara reminded him.

 "The shed's got two rooms; put him in the other one." Karrde waved toward her waist. "And do remember to lose that before our guests arrive. I doubt they'd fail to recognize it."

 Mara glanced down at Skywalker's lightsaber hanging from her belt. "Don't worry. If it's all the same to you, I'd just as soon not have much to do with them."

 "I wasn't planning for you to," Karrde assured her. "I'd like you here when I greet them, and possibly to join us for dinner, as well. Other than that, you're excused from all social activities."

 "So they're staying the day?"

 "And possibly the night, as well." He eyed her. "Requirements of a proper host aside, can you think of a better way for us to prove to the Republic, should the need arise, that Skywalker was never here?"

 It made sense. But that didn't mean she had to like it. "Are you warning the rest of theWild Karrde 's crew to keep quiet?"

 "I'm doing better than that," Karrde said, nodding back toward the comm equipment. "I've sent everyone who knows about Skywalker off to get theStarry Ice prepped. Which reminds meafter you move Skywalker, I want you to run his X-wing farther back under the trees. No more than half a kilometerI don't want you to go through any more of the forest alone than you have to. Can you fly an X-wing?"

 "I can fly anything."

 "Good," he said, smiling slightly. "You'd better be off, then. TheMillennium Falcon will be landing in less than twenty minutes."

 Mara took a deep breath. "All right," she said. Turning, she left the room.

 The compound was empty as she walked across it to the barracks building. By Karrde's design, undoubtedly; he must have shifted people around to inside duties to give her a clear path for taking Skywalker to the storage shed. Reaching his room, she keyed off the lock and slid open the door.

 He was standing by the window, dressed in that same black tunic, pants, and high boots that he'd worn that day at Jabba's palace.

 That day she'd stood silently by and watched... and let him destroy her life.

 "Get your case and let's go," she growled, gesturing with the blaster. "It's moving day."

 His eyes stayed on her as he stepped over to the bed. Not on the blaster in her hand, but on her face. "Karrde's made a decision?" he asked calmly as he picked up the case.

 For a long moment she was tempted to tell him that, no, this was on her own initiative, just to see if the implications would crack that maddening Jedi serenity. But even a Jedi would probably fight if he thought he was going to his death, and they were on a tight enough schedule as it was. "You're moving to one of the storage sheds," she told him. "We've got company coming, and we don't have any formal wear your size. Come on, move."

 She walked him past the central building to the number four shed, a two-room structure tucked conveniently back out of the compound's major traffic patterns. The room on the left, normally used for sensitive or dangerous equipment, was also the only one of the storage areas with a lock, undoubtedly the reason Karrde had chosen it to serve the role of impromptu prison. Keeping one eye on Skywalker, she keyed open the lock, wondering as she did so whether Karrde had had time to disable the inside mechanism. A quick look as the door slid open showed that he hadn't.

 Well, that could easily be corrected. "In here," she ordered, flicking on the inside light and gesturing for him to enter.

 He complied. "Looks cozy," he said, glancing around the windowless room and the piled shipping boxes that took up perhaps half the floor space to the right. "Probably quiet, too."

 "Ideal for Jedi meditation," she countered, stepping over to an open box markedBlasting Disks and taking a look inside. No problem; it was being used for spare coveralls at the moment. She gave the rest of the box markings a quick check, confirmed that there was nothing here he could possibly use to escape. "We'll get a cot or something in for you later," she said, moving back to the door. "Food, too."

 "I'm all right for now."

 "Ask me if I care." The inner lock mechanism was behind a thin metal plate. Two shots from her blaster unsealed one end of the plate and curled it back; a third vaporized a selected group of wires. "Enjoy the quiet," she said, and left.

 

 The door closed behind her, and locked... and Luke was once again alone.

 He looked around him. Piled boxes, no windows, a single locked door. "I've been in worse places," he muttered under his breath. "At least there's no Rancor here."

 For a moment he frowned at the odd thought, wondering why the Rancor pit at Jabba's palace should suddenly have flashed to mind. But he only gave it a moment. The lack of proper preparation and facilities in his new prison strongly suggested that moving him here had been a spur-of-the-moment decision, possibly precipitated by the imminent arrival of whoever the visitors were Mara had mentioned.

 And if so, there was a good possibility that somewhere in the mad scramble they might finally have made a mistake.

 He went over to the door, easing the still-warm metal plate a little farther back and kneeling down to peer inside at the lock mechanism. Han had spent a few idle hours once trying to teach him the finer points of hot-wiring locks, and if Mara's shot hadn't damaged it too badly, there was a chance he might be able to persuade it to disengage.

 It didn't look promising. Whether by design or accident, Mara's shot had taken out the wires to the inside control's power supply, vaporizing them all the way back into the wall conduit, where there was no chance at all of getting hold of them.

 But if he could find another power supply...

 He got to his feet again, brushed off his knees, and headed over to the neatly piled boxes. Mara had glanced at their labels, but she'd actually looked inside only one of them. Perhaps a more complete search would turn up something useful.

 The search, unfortunately, took even less time than his examination of the ruined lock. Most of the boxes were sealed beyond his capability to open without tools, and the handful that weren't held such innocuous items as clothing or replacement equipment modules.

 All right, then,he told himself, sitting down on the edge of one of the boxes and looking around for inspiration.I can't use the door. There aren't any windows. But therewas another room in this shedhe'd seen the other door while Mara was opening this one. Perhaps there was some kind of half-height doorway or crawl space between them, hidden out of sight behind the stacked boxes.

 It wasn't likely, of course, that Mara would have missed anything that obvious. But he had time, and nothing else to occupy it. Getting up from his seat, he began unstacking the boxes and moving them away from the wall.

 He'd barely begun when he found it. Not a doorway, but something almost as good: a multisocket power outlet, set into the wall just above the baseboard.

 Karrde and Mara had made their mistake.

 The metal doorplate, already stressed by the blaster fire Mara had used to peel it back, was relatively easy to bend. Luke kept at it, bending it back and forth, until a roughly triangular piece broke off in his hand. It was too soft to be of any use against the sealed equipment boxes, but it would probably be adequate for unscrewing the cover of a common power outlet.

 He returned to the outlet and lay down in the narrow gap between wall and boxes. He was just trying to wedge his makeshift screwdriver against the first screw when he heard a quiet beep.

 He froze, listening. The beep came again, followed by a series of equally soft warbles. Warbles that sounded very familiar... "Artoo?" he called softly. "Is that you?"

 For a pair of heartbeats there was silence from the other room. Then, abruptly, the wall erupted with a minor explosion of electronic jabbering. Artoo, without a doubt. "Steady, Artoo," Luke called back. "I'm going to try and get this power outlet open. There's probably one on your side, toocan you get it open?"

 There was a distinctly disgusted-sounding gurgle. "No, huh? Well, just hang on, then."

 The broken metal triangle wasn't the easiest thing to work with, particularly in the cramped space available. Still, it took Luke only a couple of minutes to get the cover plate off and pull the wires out of his way. Hunching forward, he could see through the hole to the back of the outlet in Artoo's room. "I don't think I can get your outlet open from here," he called to the droid. "Is your room locked?"

 There was a negative beep, followed by an odd sort of whining, as if Artoo was spinning his wheels. "Restraining bolt?" Luke asked. The spinning/whine came again "Or a restraint collar?"

 An affirmative beep, with frustrated overtones. It figured, in retrospect: a restraining bolt would leave a mark, whereas a collar snugged around Artoo's lower half would do nothing but let him wear out his wheels a little. "Never mind," Luke reassured him. "If there's enough wire in here to reach to the door, I should be able to unlock it. Then we can both get out of here."

 Carefully, mindful of the possibility of shock from the higher-current lines nearby, he found the low-voltage wire and started easing it gently toward him out of the conduit. There was more than he'd expected; he got nearly one and a half meters coiled on the floor by his head before it stopped coming.

 More than he'd expected, but far less than he needed. The door was a good four meters away in a straight line, and he would need some slack to get it spliced into the lock mechanism. "It's going to be a few more minutes," he called to Artoo, trying to think. The low-power line had a meter and a half of slack to it, which implied the other lines probably did, as well. If he could cut that much length off two of them, he should have more than enough to reach the lock.

 Which left only the problem of finding something to cut them with. And, of course, managing to not electrocute himself along the way.

 "What I wouldn't give to have my lightsaber back for a minute," he muttered, examining the edge of his makeshift screwdriver. It wasn't very sharp; but then, the superconducting wires weren't very thick, either.

 It was the work of a couple of minutes to pull the other wires as far out of the conduit as they would go. Standing up, he took off his tunic, wrapped one of the sleeves twice around the metal, and started sawing.

 He was halfway through the first of the wires when his hand slipped off the insulating sleeve and for a second touched the bare metal. Reflexively he jerked back, banging his hand against the wall.

 And then his brain caught up with him. "Uh-oh," he murmured, staring at the half-cut wire.

 There was an interrogative whistle from the other room. "I just touched one of the wires," he told the droid, "and I didn't get a shock."

 Artoo whistled. "Yeah," Luke agreed. He tapped at the wire... touched it again... held his finger against it.

 So Karrde and Mara hadn't made a mistake, after all. They'd already cut the power to the outlet.

 For a moment he knelt there, holding the wire, wondering what he was going to do now. He still had all this wire, but no power supply for it to connect with. Conversely, there were probably any number of small power sources in the room, attached to the stored replacement modules, but they were all packed away in boxes he couldn't get into. Could he somehow use the wire to get into the boxes? Use it to slice through the outer sealant layer, perhaps?

 He got a firm grip on the wire and pulled on it, trying to judge its tensile strength. His fingers slipped along the insulation; shifting his grip, he wrapped it firmly around his right hand

 And stopped, a sudden prickly feeling on the back of his neck. His right hand. His artificial right hand. His artificial, dual-power-supply right hand... "Artoo, you know anything about cybernetic limb replacements?" he called, levering the wrist access port open with his metal triangle.

 There was a short pause, then a cautious and ambiguous-sounding warble. "It shouldn't take too much," he reassured the droid, peering at the maze of wiring and servos inside his hand. He'd forgotten how incredibly complex the whole thing was. "All I need to do is get one of the power supplies out. Think you can walk me through the procedure?"

 The pause this time was shorter, and the reply more confident. "Good," Luke said. "Let's get to it."

 

 Chapter 22

 Han finished his presentation, sat back in his chair, and waited. "Interesting," Karrde said, that faintly amused, totally noncommittal expression of his hiding whatever it was he was really thinking.

 "Interesting, indeed. I presume the Provisional Council would be willing to record legal guarantees of all this."

 "We'll guarantee what we can," Han told him. "Your protection, legality of operation, and so forth. Naturally, we can't guarantee particular profit margins or anything like that."

 "Naturally," Karrde agreed, his gaze shifting to Lando. "You've been rather quiet, General Calrissian. How exactly do you fit into all of this?"

 "Just as a friend," Lando said. "Someone who knew how to get in touch with you. And someone who can vouch for Han's integrity and honesty."

 A slight smile touched Karrde's lips. "Integrity and honesty," he repeated. "Interesting words to use in regard to a man with Captain Solo's somewhat checkered reputation."

 Han grimaced, wondering which particular incident Karrde might be referring to. There were, he had to admit, a fair number to choose from. "Any checkering that existed is all in the past," he said.

 "Of course," Karrde agreed. "Your proposal is, as I said, very interesting. But not, I think, for my organization."

 "May I ask why not?" Han asked.

 "Very simply, because it would look to certain parties as if we were taking sides," Karrde explained, sipping from the cup at his side. "Given the extent of our operations, and the regions in which those operations take place, that might not be an especially politic thing to do."

 "I understand," Han nodded. "I'd like the chance to convince you that there are ways to keep your other clients from knowing about it."

 Karrde smiled again. "I think you underestimate the Empire's intelligence capabilities, Captain Solo," he said. "They know far more about Republic movements than you might think."

 "Tell me about it," Han grimaced, glancing at Lando. "That reminds me of something else I wanted to ask you. Lando said you might know a slicer who was good enough to crack diplomatic codes."

 Karrde cocked his head slightly to the side. "Interesting request," he commented. "Particularly coming from someone who should already have access to such codes. Is intrigue beginning to form among the New Republic hierarchy, perhaps?"

 That last conversation with Winter, and her veiled warnings, flashed through Han's mind. "This is purely personal," he assured Karrde. "Mostly personal, anyway."

 "Ah," the other said. "As it happens, one of the best slicers in the trade will be at dinner this afternoon. You'll join us, of course?"

 Han glanced at his watch in surprise. Between business and small talk, the fifteen-minute interview that Torve had promised him with Karrde had now stretched out into two hours. "We don't want to impose on your time"

 "It's no imposition at all," Karrde assured him, setting his cup down and standing. "With the press of business and all, we tend to miss the midday meal entirely and compensate by pushing the evening dinner up to late afternoon."

 "I remember those wonderful smuggler schedules," Han nodded wryly, memories flashing through his mind. "You're lucky to get even two meals."

 "Indeed," Karrde agreed. "If you'll follow me...?"

 The main building, Han had noted on the way in, seemed to be composed of three or four circular zones centering on the greatroom with the strange tree growing through it. The room Karrde took them to now was in the layer just outside the greatroom, taking perhaps a quarter of that circle. A number of round tables were set up, with several of them already occupied. "We don't stand on protocol regarding meals here," Karrde said, leading the way to a table in the center of the room. Four people were already sitting there: three men and a woman.

 Karrde steered them to three vacant seats. "Good evening, all," he nodded to the others at the table. "May I present Calrissian and Solo, who'll be dining with us tonight." He gestured to each of the men in turn. "Three of my associates: Wadewarn, Chin, and Ghent. Ghent is the slicer I mentioned; possibly the best in the business." He waved to the woman. "And of course you've already met Mara Jade."

 "Yes," Han agreed, nodding to her and sitting down, a small shiver running up his back. Mara had been with Karrde when he'd first welcomed them into that makeshift throne room of his. She hadn't stayed long; but for the whole of that brief time she'd glowered darkly at Lando and him with those incredible green eyes of hers.

 Almost exactly the same way she was glowering at them right now.

 "So you're Han Solo," the slicer, Ghent, said brightly. "I've heard a lot about you. Always wanted to meet you."

 Han shifted his attention away from Mara to Ghent. He wasn't much more than a kid, really, barely out of his teens. "It's nice to be famous," Han told him. "Just remember that whatever you've heard has been hearsay. And that hearsay stories grow an extra leg every time they're told."

 "You're too modest," Karrde said, signaling to the side. In response, a squat droid rolled toward them from around the room's curve, a tray of what looked like rolled leaves perched on top of it. "It would be difficult to embellish that Zygerrian slaver incident, for example."

 Lando looked up from the droid's tray. "Zygerrian slavers?" he echoed. "You never told me that one."

 "It wasn't anything important," Han said, warning Lando with a look to drop the subject.

 Unfortunately, Ghent either missed the look or was too young to know what it meant. "He and Chewbacca attacked a Zygerrian slaver ship," the kid explained eagerly. "Just the two of them. The Zygerrians were so scared they abandoned ship."

 "They were more pirates than slavers," Han said, giving up. "And they weren't afraid of methey abandoned ship because I told them I had twenty stormtroopers with me and was coming aboard to check their shipping licenses."

 Lando raised his eyebrows. "And theybought that?"

 Han shrugged. "I was broadcasting a borrowed Imperial ID at the time."

 "But then you know what he did?" Ghent put in. "He gave the ship over to the slaves they found locked up in the hold.Gave it to themjust like that! Including all the cargo, too."

 "Why, you old softie," Lando grinned, taking a bite from one of the rolled leaves. "No wonder you never told me that one."

 With an effort, Han held onto his patience. "The cargo was pirate plunder," he growled. "Some of it extremely traceable. We were off Janodral Mizarthey had a strange local law at the time that pirate or slaver victims got to split up the proceeds if the pirates were taken or killed."

 "That law's still in force, as far as I know," Karrde murmured.

 "Probably. Anyway, Chewie was with me... and you know Chewie's opinion of slavers."

 "Yeah," Lando said dryly. "They'd have had a better chance with the twenty stormtroopers."

 "And if I hadn't just given away the ship" Han broke off as a quiet beep sounded.

 "Excuse me," Karrde said, pulling a comlink from his belt. "Karrde here."

 Han couldn't hear what was being said... but abruptly Karrde's face seemed to tighten. "I'll be right there."

 He got to his feet and slipped the comlink back onto his belt. "Excuse me again," he said. "A small matter needs my attention."

 "Trouble?" Han asked.

 "I hope not." Karrde glanced across the table, and Han turned in time to see Mara stand up. "Hopefully, this will only take a few minutes. Please enjoy your meal."

 They left the table, and Han looked back at Lando. "I've got a bad feeling about this," he muttered.

 Lando nodded, his eyes still following Mara and Karrde, a strange expression on his face. "I've seen her before, Han," he murmured back. "I don't know where, but I know I've seen her and I don't think she was a smuggler at the time."

 Han looked around the table at the others, at the wariness in their eyes and the guarded murmuring back and forth between them. Even Ghent had noticed the sudden tension and was studiously eating away at his appetizers. "Well, figure it out fast, buddy," he told Lando quietly. "We might be about to wear out our welcome."

 "I'm working on it. What do we do until then?" Another droid was trundling up, his tray laden with filled soup bowls. "Until then," Han said, "I guess we enjoy our meal."

 

 "He came in from lightspeed about ten minutes ago," Aves said tightly, tapping the mark on the sensor display. "Captain Pellaeon signaled two minutes later. Asking for you personally."

 Karrde rubbed a finger gently across his lower lip. "Any signs of landing craft or fighters?" he asked.

 "Not yet," Aves shook his head. "But from his insertion angle, I'd guess he'll be dropping some soondownpoint probably somewhere in this part of the forest."

 Karrde nodded thoughtfully. Such propitious timing... for someone. "Where did we wind up putting theMillennium Falcon ?"

 "It's over on pad eight," Aves said.

 Back in under the edge of the forest, then. That was goodthe high metal content of Myrkr's trees would help shield it from theChimera 's sensors. "Take two men and go throw a camo net over it," he told the other. "There's no point in taking chances. And do it quietlywe don't want to alarm our guests."

 "Right." Aves pulled off his headset and headed out of the room at a brisk trot.

 Karrde looked at Mara. "Interesting timing, this visit."

 She met his gaze without flinching. "If that's a subtle way of asking whether or not I called them, don't bother. I didn't."

 He cocked his head. "Really. I'm a little surprised."

 "So am I," she countered. "I should have thought of it days ago." She nodded toward the headset. "You going to talk to him or not?"

 "I don't suppose I have much choice." Mentally bracing himself, Karrde sat down in the seat Aves had just vacated and touched a switch. "Captain Pellaeon, this is Talon Karrde," he said. "My apologies for the delay. What can I do for you?"

 The distant image of theChimaera disappeared, but it wasn't Pellaeon's face that replaced it. This face was a nightmare image: long and lean, with pale blue skin and eyes that glittered like two bits of red-hot metal. "Good afternoon, Captain Karrde," the other said, his voice clear and smooth and very civilized. "I'm Grand Admiral Thrawn."

 "Good afternoon, Admiral," Karrde nodded in greeting, taking it in stride. "This is an unexpected honor. May I ask the purpose of your call?"

 "Part of it I'm sure you've already guessed," Thrawn told him. "We find ourselves in need of more ysalamiri, and would like your permission to harvest some more of them."

 "Certainly," Karrde said, a funny feeling starting to tug at the back of his mind. There was something strange about Thrawn's posture... and the Imperials hardly needed his permission to come pull ysalamiri off their trees. "If I may say so, you seem to be running through them rather quickly. Are you having trouble keeping them alive?"

 Thrawn raised an eyebrow in polite surprise. "None of them has died, Captain. We simply need more of them."

 "Ah," Karrde said. "I see."

 "I doubt that. But no matter. It occurred to me, Captain, that as long as we were coming here, it might be a good time for us to have a little talk."

 "What sort of talk?"

 "I'm sure we can find some topics of mutual interest," Thrawn said. "For example, I'm in the market for new warships."

 Long practice kept any guilty reaction from leaking out through Karrde's face or voice. But it was a near thing. "Warships?" he asked carefully.

 "Yes." Thrawn favored him with a thin smile. "Don't worryI'm not expecting you to actually have any capital starships in stock. But a man with your contacts may possibly be able to acquire them."

 "I doubt that my contacts are quite that extensive, Admiral," Karrde told him, trying hard to read that not-quite-human face. Did he know? Or was the question merely an exquisitely dangerous coincidence? "I don't think we'll be able to help you."

 Thrawn's expression didn't change... but abruptly there was an edge of menace to his smile. "You'll try anyway. And then there's the matter of your refusal to help in our search for Luke Skywalker."

 Some of the tightness in Karrde's chest eased. This was safer territory. "I'm sorry we were also unable to help there, Admiral. As I explained before to your representative, we were under several tight scheduling deadlines at the time. We simply couldn't spare the ships."

 Thrawn's eyebrows lifted slightly. "At the time, you say? But the search is still going on, Captain."

 Silently, Karrde cursed himself for the slip. "Still going on?" he echoed, frowning. "But your representative said Skywalker was flying an Incom X-wing starfighter. If you haven't found him by now, his life support will surely have given out."

 "Ah," Thrawn said, nodding. "I see the misunderstanding. Normally, yes, you'd be correct. But Skywalker is a Jedi; and among a Jedi's bag of tricks is the ability to go into a sort of comatose state." He paused, and the image on the screen flickered momentarily. "So there's still plenty of time for you to join in the hunt."

 "I see," Karrde said. "Interesting. I suppose that's just one of the many things the average person never knew about Jedi."

 "Perhaps we'll have time to discuss such things when I arrive on Myrkr," Thrawn said.

 Karrde froze, a horrible realization shooting through him like an electric shock. That brief flickering of Thrawn's image

 A glance at the auxiliary sensor display confirmed it: threeLambda -class shuttles and a full TIE fighter escort had left theChimaera , heading toward the surface. "I'm afraid we don't have much to entertain you with," he said between suddenly stiff lips. Certainly not on such short notice."

 "No need for entertainment," Thrawn assured him. "As I said, I'm simply coming for a talk. Abrief talk, of course; I know how busy you are."

 "I appreciate your consideration," Karrde said. "If you'll excuse me, Admiral, I need to begin the preparations to receive you."

 "I look forward to our meeting," Thrawn said. His face vanished, and the display returned to its distant view of theChimaera .

 For a long moment Karrde just sat there, the possibilities and potential disasters flipping through his mind at top speed. "Get on the comlink to Chin," he told Mara. "Tell him we have Imperial guests coming, and he's to begin preparations to receive them properly. Then go to pad eight and have Aves move theMillennium Falcon farther back under cover. Go there in persontheChimaera and its shuttles might be able to tap into our comlink transmissions."

 "What about Solo and Calrissian?"

 Karrde pursed his lips. "We'll have to get them out, of course. Move them into the forest, perhaps at or near their ship. I'd better deal with that myself."

 "Why not turn them over to Thrawn?"

 He looked up at her. At those burning eyes and that rigid, tightly controlled face... "With no offer of a bounty?" he asked. "Relying on the Grand Admiral's generosity after the fact?"

 "I don't find that a compelling reason," Mara said bluntly.

 "Neither do I," he countered coldly. "What Ido find compelling is that they're our guests. They've sat at our table and eaten our food... and like it or not, that means they're under our protection."

 Mara's lip twitched. "And do these rules of hospitality apply to Skywalker, too?" she asked sardonically.

 "You know they don't," he said. "But now is not the time or the place to turn him over to the Empire, even if that's the way the decision ultimately goes. Do you understand?"

 "No," she growled. "I don't."

 Karrde eyed her, strongly tempted to tell her that she didn't need to understand, only to obey. "It's a matter of relative strength," he told her instead. "Here on the ground, with an Imperial Star Destroyer orbiting overhead, we have no bargaining position at all. I wouldn't do business under such circumstances even if Thrawn was the most trustworthy client in the galaxy. Which he's not.Now do you understand?"

 She took a deep breath, let it out. "I don't agree," she gritted. "But I'll accept your decision."

 "Thank you. Perhaps after the Imperials leave, you can ask General Calrissian about the perils of making bargains while stormtroopers are strolling around your territory." Karrde looked back at the display. "So.Falcon moved; Solo and Calrissian moved. Skywalker and the droid should be all right where they arethe four shed has enough shielding to keep out anything but a fairly determined probe."

 "And if Thrawnis determined?"

 "Then we may have trouble," Karrde agreed calmly. "On the other hand, I doubt that Thrawn would be coming down himself if he thought there was the possibility of a firefight. The upper military ranks don't achieve that status by risking their own lives unnecessarily." He nodded at the door. "Enough talk. You have your job; I have mine. Let's get to them."

 She nodded and turned to the door; and as she did so, a sudden thought struck him. "Where did you put Skywalker's lightsaber?" he asked.

 "It's in my room," she said, turning back. "Why?"

 "Better get it and put it somewhere else. Lightsabers aren't supposed to be highly detectable, but there's no point in taking chances. Put it in with the resonator cavities in three shed; they ought to provide adequate shielding from stray sensor probes."

 "Right." She regarded him thoughtfully. "What was all that business about capital starships?"

 "You heard everything that was said."

 "I know. I was talking about your reaction to it."

 He grimaced to himself. "I'd hoped it wasn't that obvious."

 "It wasn't." She waited expectantly.

 He pursed his lips. "Ask me again later. Right now, we have work to do."

 For another second she studied him. Then, without a word, she nodded and left.

 Taking a deep breath, Karrde got to his feet. First thing to do would be to get back to the dining room and inform his guests of the sudden change in plans. And after that, to prepare himself for a face-to-face confrontation with the most dangerous man in the Empire. With Skywalker and spare warships as two of the topics of conversation.

 It was going to be a most interesting afternoon.

 

 "Okay, Artoo," Luke called as he made the last of the connections. "I think we're ready to try it. Cross your fingers."

 From the next room came a complicated series of electronic jabbers. Probably, Luke decided, the droid reminding him that he didn't have any fingers to cross.

 Fingers. For a moment Luke looked down at his right hand, flexing his fingers and feeling the unpleasant pins-and-needles tingling/numbness there. It had been five years since he'd really thought of the hand as being a machine attached to his arm. Now, suddenly, it was impossible to think of it as anything but that.

 Artoo beeped impatiently. "Right," Luke agreed, forcing his attention away from his hand as best he could and moving the end of the wire toward what he hoped was the proper contact point. It could have been worse, he realized: the hand could have been designed with only a single power supply, in which case he wouldn't have even this much use of it. "Here goes," he said, and touched the wire.

 And with no fuss or dramatics whatsoever, the door slid quietly open.

 "Got it," Luke hissed. Carefully, trying not to lose the contact point, he leaned over and peered outside.

 The sun was starting to sink behind the trees, throwing long shadows across the compound. From his position Luke could see only a little of the grounds, but what he could see seemed to be deserted. Setting his feet, he let go of the wire and dived for the doorway.

 With the contact broken, the door slid shut again, nearly catching his left ankle as he hit the ground and rolled awkwardly into a crouch. He froze, waiting to see if the noise would spark any reaction. But the silence continued; and after a few seconds, he got to his feet and ran to the shed's other door.

 Artoo had been right: there was indeed no lock on this half of the shed. Luke hit the release, threw one last glance around, and slipped inside.

 The droid beeped an enthusiastic greeting, bobbing back and forth awkwardly in the restraint collar, a torus-shaped device that fit snugly around his legs and wheels. "Quiet, Artoo," Luke warned the other, kneeling down to examine the collar. "And hold still."

 He'd been worried that the collar would be locked or intertwined into Artoo's wheel system in some way, requiring special tools to disengage. But the device was much simpler than thatit merely held enough of the droid's weight off the floor so that he couldn't get any real traction. Luke released a pair of clasps and pushed the hinged halves apart, and Artoo was free. "Come on," he told the droid, and headed back to the door.

 As far as he could see, the compound was still deserted. "The ship's around that way," he whispered, pointing toward the central building. "Looks like the best approach would be to circle to the left, keeping inside the trees as much as we can. Can you handle the terrain?"

 Artoo raised his scanner, beeped a cautious affirmative. "Okay. Keep an eye out for anyone coming out of the buildings."

 They'd made it into the woods, and were perhaps a quarter of the way around the circle, when Artoo gave a warning chirp. "Freeze," Luke whispered, stopping dead beside a large tree trunk and hoping they were enough in the shadows. His own black outfit should blend adequately into the darkening forest background, but Artoo's white and blue were another matter entirely.

 Fortunately, the three men who came out of the central building never looked in their direction, but headed straight toward the edge of the forest.

 Headed there at a fast, determined trot... and just before they disappeared into the trees, all three drew their blasters.

 Artoo moaned softly. "I don't like it, either," Luke told him. "Let's hope it doesn't have anything to do with us. All clear?"

 The droid beeped affirmation, and they started off again. Luke kept half an eye on the forest behind them, remembering Mara's veiled hints about large predators. It could have been a lie, of course, designed to discourage him from trying to escape. For that matter, he'd never spotted any real evidence that the window of his previous room had had an alarm on it.

 Artoo beeped again. Luke twisted his attention back to the compound... and froze.

 Mara had stepped out of the central building.

 For what seemed like a long time she just stood there on the doorstep, looking distractedly up into the sky. Luke watched her, not daring even to look down to see how well concealed Artoo might be. If she turned in their directionor if she went to the shed to see how he was doing...

 Abruptly, she looked down again, a determined expression on her face. She turned toward the second barracks building and headed off at a brisk walk.

 Luke let out a breath he hadn't realized he'd been holding. They were far from being out of dangerall Mara had to do was turn her head 90 degrees to her left and she'd be looking directly at them. But something about her posture seemed to indicate that her attention and thoughts were turned inward.

 As if she'd suddenly made a hard decision...

 She went into the barracks, and Luke made a quick decision of his own. "Come on, Artoo," he murmured. "It's getting too crowded out here. We're going to cut farther into the forest, come up on the ships from behind."

 It was, fortunately, a short distance to the maintenance hangar and the group of ships parked alongside it. They arrived after only a few minutesto discover their X-wing gone.

 "No, I don't know where they've moved it to," Luke gritted, looking around as best he could while still staying under cover. "Can your sensors pick it up?"

 Artoo beeped a negative, adding a chirping explanation Luke couldn't even begin to follow. "Well, it doesn't matter," he reassured the droid. "We'd have had to put down somewhere else on the planet and find something with a working hyperdrive, anyway. We'll just skip that step and take one of these."

 He glanced around, hoping to find a Z-95 or Y-wing or something else he was at least marginally familiar with. But the only ships he recognized were a Corellian Corvette and what looked like a downsized bulk freighter. "Got any suggestions?" he asked Artoo.

 The droid beeped a prompt affirmative, his little sensor dish settling on a pair of long, lean ships about twice the length or Luke's X-wing. Fighters, obviously, but not like anything the Alliance had ever used. "One of those?" he asked doubtfully.

 Artoo beeped again, a distinct note of impatience to the sound. "Right; we're a little pressed for time," Luke agreed.

 They made it across to one of the fighters without incident. Unlike the X-wing design, the entrance was a hinged hatchway door in the sidepossibly one reason Artoo had chosen it, Luke decided as he manhandled the droid inside. The pilot's cockpit wasn't much roomier than an X-wing's, but directly behind it was a three-seat tech/weapons area. The seats weren't designed for astromech droids, of course, but with a little ingenuity on Luke's part and some stretch on the restraints', he managed to get Artoo wedged between two of the seats and firmly strapped in place. "Looks like everything's already on standby," he commented, glancing at the flickering lights on the control boards. "There's an outlet right theregive everything a quick check while I strap in. With a little luck, maybe we can be out of here before anyone even knows we're gone."

 

 She had delivered the open comlink message to Chin, and the quieter ones to Aves and the others at theMillennium Falcon ; and as she stalked her way glowering across the compound toward the number three shed, Mara decided once more that she hated the universe.

 She'd been the one who'd found Skywalker. She, by herself, alone. There was no question about that; no argument even possible. It should be she, not Karrde, who had the final say on his fate.

 I should have left him out there,she told herself bitterly as she stomped across the beaten ground.Should have just let him die in the cold of space. She'd considered that, too, at the time. But if he'd died out there, all alone, she might never have known for sure that he was, in fact, dead.

 And she certainly wouldn't have had the satisfaction of killing him herself.

 She looked down at the lightsaber clenched in her hand, watching the afternoon sunlight glint from the silvery metal as she hefted its weight. She could do it now, she knew. Could go in there to check on him and claim he had tried to jump her. Without the Force to call on, he would be an easy target, even for someone like her who hadn't picked up a lightsaber more than a handful of times in her life. It would be easy, clean, and very fast.

 And she didn't owe Karrde anything, no matter how well his organization might have treated her. Not about something like this.

 And yet...

 She was coming up on four shed, still undecided, when she heard the faint whine of a repulsorlift.

 She peered up into the sky, shading her eyes with her free hand as she tried to spot the incoming ship. But nothing was visible... and as the whine grew louder, she realized abruptly that it was the sound of one of their own vehicles. She spun around and looked over toward the maintenance hangar

 Just in time to see one of their two Skipray blastboats rise above the treetops.

 For a pair of heartbeats she stared at the ship, wondering what in the Empire Karrde thought he was doing. Sending an escort or pilot ship for the Imperials, perhaps?

 And then, abruptly, it clicked.

 She twisted back and sprinted for the four shed, pulling her blaster from its forearm sheath as she ran. The lock on the room inexplicably refused to open; she tried it twice and then blasted it.

 Skywalker was gone.

 She swore, viciously, and ran out into the compound. The Skipray had shifted to forward motion now, disappearing behind the trees to the west. Jamming her blaster back into its sheath, she grabbed the comlink off her belt

 And swore again. The Imperials could be here at any minute, and any mention of Skywalker's presence would land them all in very deep trouble indeed.

 Which left her with exactly one option.

 She reached the second Skipray at a dead run and had it in the air within two minutes. Skywalker would notwouldnot get away now.

 Kicking the drive to full power, she screamed off in pursuit.

 

 Chapter 23

 They showed up almost simultaneously on the scopes: the other of Karrde's fighter ships pursuing him from behind, and the Imperial Star Destroyer in orbit far overhead. "I think," Luke called back to Artoo, "that we're in trouble."

 The droid's reply was almost swallowed up in the roar as Luke gingerly eased the drive up as high as he dared. The strange fighter's handling wasn't even remotely like anything he'd ever flown before; slightly reminiscent of the snowspeeders the Alliance had used on Hoth, but with the kind of sluggish response time that implied a great deal of armor and engine mass. With time, he was pretty sure he'd be able to master it.

 But time was something he was rapidly running out of.

 He risked a glance at the aft-vision display. The other fighter was coming up fast, with no more than a minute or two now separating the two ships. Obviously, the pilot had far more experience with the craft than Luke had. That, or else such a fierce determination to recapture Luke that it completely overrode normal common-sense caution.

 Either way, it meant Mara Jade.

 The fighter dipped a little too deep, scraping its ventral tail fin against the tops of the trees and drawing a sharp squeal of protest from Artoo. "Sorry," Luke called back, feeling a fresh surge of perspiration break out on his forehead as he again carefully eased the drive up a notch. Speaking of overriding common sense... But at the moment, sticking to the treetops was about the only option he had. The forest below, for some unknown reason, seemed to have a scattering or scrambling effect on sensor scans, both detection and navigational. Staying low forced his pursuer to stay low, too, lest she lose visual contact with him against the mottled forest backdrop, and also at least partially hid him from the orbiting Star Destroyer.

 The Star Destroyer. Luke glanced at the image on his overhead scope, feeling his stomach tighten. At least he knew now who the company was Mara had mentioned. It looked like he'd gotten out just in the nick of time.

 On the other hand, perhaps the move to that storage shed implied that Karrde had decided not to sell him to the Imperials after all. It might be worth asking Karrde about someday. Preferably from a great distance.

 Behind him, Artoo suddenly trilled a warning. Luke jerked in his seat, eyes flickering across the scopes as he searched for the source of the trouble

 And jerked again. There, directly above his dorsal tail fin and less than a ship's length away, was the other fighter.

 "Hang on!" Luke shouted at Artoo, clenching his teeth tightly together. His one chance now was to pull a drop-kick Koiogran turn, killing his forward momentum and loop-rolling into another direction. Twisting the control stick with one hand, he jammed the throttle forward with the other

 And abruptly, the cockpit canopy exploded into a slapping tangle of tree branches, and he was thrown hard against his restraints as the fighter spun and twisted and rolled out of control.

 The last thing he heard before the darkness took him was Artoo's shrill electronic scream.

 

 The three shuttles came to a perfectly synchronized landing as, overhead, the TIE fighter escort shot by in equally perfect formation. "The Empire's parade-ground expertise hasn't eroded, anyway," Aves murmured.

 "Quiet," Karrde murmured back, watching the shuttle ramps lower to the ground. The center one, almost certainly, would be Thrawn's.

 Marching with blaster rifles held ceremonially across their chests, a line of stormtroopers filed down each of the three ramps. Behind them, emerging not from the center but from the rightmost of the shuttles, came a handful of midranking officers. Following them came a short, wiry being of unknown race with dark gray skin, bulging eyes, a protruding jaw, and the look of a bodyguard. Following him came Grand Admiral Thrawn.

 So much,Karrde thought,for him doing things the obvious way. It would be something to make a note of for future reference.

 With his small reception committee beside him, he walked toward the approaching group of Imperials, trying to ignore the stares of the stormtroopers. "Grand Admiral Thrawn," he nodded in greeting. "Welcome to our little corner of Myrkr. I'm Talon Karrde."

 "Pleased to meet you, Captain," Thrawn said, inclining his head slightly. Those glowing eyes, Karrde decided, were even more impressive in person than they were on a comm display. And considerably more intimidating.

 "I apologize for our somewhat less than formal greeting," Karrde continued, waving a hand at his group. "We don't often entertain people of your status here."

 Thrawn cocked a blue-black eyebrow. "Really. I'd have thought a man in your position would be used to dealing with the elite. Particularly high planetary officials whose cooperation, shall we say, you find you require?"

 Karrde smiled easily. "We deal with the elite from time to time. But not here. This iswas, I should say," he added, glancing significantly at the stormtroopers, "our private operations base."

 "Of course," Thrawn said. "Interesting drama a few minutes ago out there to the west. Tell me about it."

 With an effort, Karrde hid a grimace. He'd hoped the sensor-scrambling effect of Myrkr's trees would have hidden the Skipray chase from Thrawn's view. Obviously, it hadn't. "Merely a small internal problem," he assured the Grand Admiral. "A former and somewhat disgruntled employee broke into one of our storage sheds, stole some merchandise, and made off with one of our ships. Another of our people is in pursuit."

 "Wasin pursuit, Captain," Thrawn corrected lazily, those eyes seeming to burn into Karrde's face. "Or didn't you know they both went down?"

 Karrde stared at him, a thin needle of ice running through him. "I didn't know that, no," he said. "Our sensorsthe metallic content of the trees fouls them up badly."

 "We had a higher observation angle," Thrawn said. "It looked as if the first ship hit the trees, with the pursuer getting caught in the slipstream." He regarded Karrde thoughtfully. "I take it the pursuer was someone special?"

 Karrde let his face harden a bit. "All my associates are special," he said, pulling out his comlink. "Please excuse me a moment; I have to get a rescue team organized."

 Thrawn took a long step forward, reaching two pale blue fingers to cover the top of the comlink. "Permit me," he said smoothly. "Troop commander?"

 One of the stormtroopers stepped forward. "Sir?"

 "Take a detail out to the crash site," Thrawn ordered, his eyes still on Karrde. "Examine the wreckage, and bring back any survivors. And anything that looks like it wouldn't normally belong in a Skipray blastboat."

 "Yes, sir." The other gestured, and one of the columns of stormtroopers turned and retraced their steps up the ramp of the left-most shuttle.

 "I appreciate your assistance, Admiral," Karrde said, his mouth suddenly a little dry. "But it really isn't necessary."

 "On the contrary, Captain," Thrawn said softly. "Your assistance with the ysalamiri has left us in your debt. How better for us to repay you?"

 "How better, indeed?" Karrde murmured. The ramp lifted into place, and with the hum of repulsorlifts, the shuttle rose into the air. The cards were dealt, and there was nothing he could do now to alter them. He could only hope that Mara somehow had things under control.

 With anyone else, he wouldn't have bet on it. With Mara... there was a chance.

 "And now," Thrawn said, "I believe you were going to show me around?"

 "Yes," Karrde nodded. "If you'll come this way, please?"

 

 "Looks like the stormtroopers are leaving," Han said quietly, pressing the macrobinoculars a little harder against his forehead. "Some of them, anyway. Filing back into one of the shuttles."

 "Let me see," Lando muttered from the other side of the tree.

 Keeping his movements slow and careful, Han handed the macrobinoculars over. There was no telling what kind of equipment they had on those shuttles and TIE fighters, and he didn't especially trust all this talk about how good the trees were at sensor shielding.

 "Yes, it seems to be just the one shuttle that's going," Lando agreed.

 Han half turned, the serrated, grasslike plants they were lying on top of digging into his shirt with the movement. "You get Imperial visitors here often?" he demanded.

 "Not here," Ghent shook his head nervously, his teeth almost chattering with tension. "They've been to the forest once or twice to pick up some ysalamiri, but they've never come to the base. At least, not while I was here."

 "Ysalamiri?" Lando frowned. "What are those?"

 "Little furry snakes with legs," Ghent said. "I don't know what they're good for. Look, couldn't we get back to the ship now? Karrde told me I was supposed to keep you there, where you'd be safe."

 Han ignored him. "What do you think?" he asked Lando.

 The other shrugged. "Got to have something to do with that Skipray that went burning out of here just as Karrde was herding us out."

 "There was some kind of prisoner," Ghent offered. "Karrde and Jade had him stashed awaymaybe he got out. Now, can weplease get back to"

 "A prisoner?" Lando repeated, frowning back at the kid. "When did Karrde start dealing with prisoners?"

 "Maybe when he started dealing with kidnappers," Han growled before Ghent could answer.

 "We don't deal with kidnappers," Ghent protested.

 "Well, you're dealing with one now," Han told him, nodding toward the group of Imperials. "That little gray guy in there?that's one of the aliens who tried to kidnap Leia and me."

 "What?" Lando peered through the macrobinoculars again. "Are you sure?"

 "It's one of the species, anyway. We didn't stop at the time to get names." Han looked back at Ghent. "This prisonerwho was he?"

 "I don't know," Ghent shook his head. "They brought him back on theWild Karrde a few days ago and put him in the shortterm barracks. I think they'd just moved him over to one of the storage sheds when we got the word that the Imperials were coming down for a visit."

 "What did he look like?"

 "I don'tknow! " Ghent hissed, what little was left of his composure going fast. Skulking around forests and spying on armed stormtroopers was clearly not the sort of thing an expert slicer was supposed to have to put up with. "None of us was supposed to go near him or ask any questions about him."

 Lando caught Han's eye. "Could be someone they don't want the Imperials to get hold of. A defector, maybe, trying to get to the New Republic?"

 Han felt his lip twist. "I'm more worried right now about them having moved him out of the barracks. That could mean the stormtroopers are planning to move in for a while."

 "Karrde didn't say anything about that," Ghent objected.

 "Karrde may not know it yet," Lando said dryly. "Trust meI was on the short end of a stormtrooper bargain once." He handed the macrobinoculars back to Han. "Looks like they're going inside."

 They were, indeed. Han watched as the procession set off: Karrde and the blue-skinned Imperial officer in front, their respective entourages following, the twin columns of stormtroopers flanking the whole parade. "Any idea who that guy with the red eyes is?" he asked Ghent.

 "I think he's a Grand Admiral or something," the other said. "Took over Imperial operations a while back. I don't know his name."

 Han looked at Lando, found the other sending the same look right back at him. "A Grand Admiral?" Lando repeated carefully.

 "Yeah. Look, they're goingthere's nothing else to see. Can weplease ?"

 "Let's get back to theFalcon," Han muttered, stowing the macrobinoculars in their belt pouch and starting a backwards elbows-and-knees crawl from their covering tree. A Grand Admiral. No wonder the New Republic had been getting the sky cut out from under them lately.

 "I don't suppose you have any records on Imperial Grand Admirals back on theFalcon ," Lando murmured, backing up alongside him.

 "No," Han told him. "But they've got 'em on Coruscant."

 "Great," Lando said, the words almost lost in the hissing of the sharp-bladed grass as they elbowed their way through it. "Let's hope we live long enough to get this tidbit back there."

 "We will," Han assured him grimly. "We'll stick around long enough to find out what kind of game Karrde's playing, but then we're gone. Even if we have to blow out of here with that camo net still hanging off the ship."

 

 The strangest thing about waking up this time, Luke decided dimly, was that he didn't actually hurt anywhere.

 And he should have. From what he remembered of those last few secondsand from the view of splintered trees outside the fighter's twisted canopyhe would have counted himself lucky even to be alive, let alone undamaged. Clearly, the restraints and crash balloons had been augmented by something more sophisticatedan emergency acceleration compensator, perhaps.

 A shaky sort of gurgle came from behind him. "You okay, Artoo?" he called, levering himself out of his seat and climbing awkwardly across the canted floor. "Hang on, I'm coming."

 The droid's information retrieval jack had been snapped off in the crash, but apart from that and a couple of minor dents, he didn't seem to have been damaged. "We'd better get moving," Luke told him, untangling him from his restraints. "That other ship could be back with a ground party any time."

 With an effort, he got Artoo aft. The hatchway door popped open without serious complaint; hopping down, he looked around.

 The second fighter would not be returning with any ground parties. It was right here. In worse shape, if possible, than Luke's.

 From the hatchway, Artoo whistled in squeamish-sounding awe. Luke glanced up at him, looked back at the ruined craft. Given the fighters' safety equipment, it was unlikely that Mara was seriously injured. A backup flight was inevitableshe would probably be able to hold out until then.

 But then again, she might not.

 "Wait here, Artoo," he told the droid. "I'm going to take a quick look."

 Even though the exterior of the fighter was in worse shape than Luke's, the interior actually seemed to be a little better off. Crunching his way across the bits of debris in the weapons/tech area, he stepped into the cockpit doorway.

 Only the top of the pilot's head showed over the seat back, but that shimmering red-gold hair was all he needed to see to know that his earlier guess had been correct. It was indeed Mara Jade who'd been chasing him.

 For a pair of heartbeats he stayed where he was, torn between the need for haste and the need to satisfy his internal sense of ethics. He and Artoo had to get out of here with all possible speed; that much was obvious. But if he turned his back on Mara now, without even pausing to check her condition...

 His mind flashed back to Coruscant, to the night Ben Kenobi had said his final farewells.In other words, he'd told Threepio later up on the roof,a Jedi can't get so caught up in matters of galactic importance that it interferes with his concern for individual people. And it would, after all, only take a minute. Stepping into the room, he looked around the seat back.

 Directly into a pair of wide-open, perfectly conscious green eyes. Green eyes that stared at him over the barrel of a tiny blaster.

 "I figured you'd come," she said, her voice grimly satisfied. "Back up. Now."

 He did as ordered. "Are you hurt at all?" he asked.

 "None of your business," she retorted. She climbed out of the seat, pulling a small flat case from under the chair with her free hand as she stood up. Another glitter caught his eye: she was again wearing his lightsaber on her belt. "There's a case in that compartment just over the exit hatch," she told him. "Get it."

 He found the release and got the compartment open. Inside was an unfamiliarly labeled metal case with the very familiar look of a survival kit to it. "I hope we're not going to have to walk the whole way back," he commented, pulling the bag out and dropping out the hatchway.

 "Iwon't," she countered. She seemed to hesitate, just a little, before following him down to the ground. "Whether you make the trip back at all is another question."

 He locked gazes with her. "Finishing what you started with this?" he asked, nodding at his wrecked ship.

 She snorted. "Listen, buddy boy, it wasyou who took us down, not me. My only mistake was being stupid enough to be sitting too close to your tail when you hit the trees. Put the bag down and get that droid out of there."

 Luke did as he was told. By the time Artoo was down beside him she had the survival kit's lid open and was fiddling one-handed with something inside. "Just stay right there," she told him. "And keep your hands where I can see them."

 She paused, cocking her head slightly to the side as if listening. A moment later, in the distance, Luke could hear the faint sound of an approaching ship. "Sounds like our ride back is already on the way," Mara said. "I want you and the droid" She stopped in midsentence, her eyes going strangely unfocused, her throat tight with concentration. Luke frowned, eyes and ears searching for the problem...

 Abruptly, she slammed the survival kit lid shut and scooped it up. "Move!" she snapped, gesturing away from the wrecked fighters. With her blaster hand she picked up the flat box she'd been carrying and wedged it under her left arm. "Into the treesboth of you. I saidmove! "

 There was something in her voicecommand, or urgency, or boththat stifled argument or even question. Within a handful of seconds Luke and Artoo were under cover of the nearest trees. "Farther in," she ordered. "Come on, move it."

 Belatedly, it occurred to Luke that this might all be some macabre jokethat all Mara really wanted was to shoot him in the back and be able to claim afterward that he'd been running away. But she was right behind him, close enough that he could hear her breathing and occasionally feel the tip of her blaster as it brushed his back. They made it perhaps ten meters farther inLuke leaned down to help Artoo across a particularly wide root

 "Far enough," Mara hissed in his ear. "Hide the droid and then hit dirt."

 Luke got Artoo over the root and behind a tree... and as he dropped down beside Mara, he suddenly understood.

 Hanging in midair over the wrecked fighters, rotating slowly like a hovering raptor searching for prey, was an Imperial shuttle.

 A small motion caught the corner of his eye, and he turned his head to look directly into the muzzle of Mara's blaster. "Not a move," she whispered, her breath warm on his cheek. "Not a sound."

 He nodded understanding and turned back to watch the shuttle. Mara slid her arm over his shoulders, pressed her blaster into the hinge of his jaw, and did the same.

 The shuttle finished its circle and settled gingerly to the torn-up ground between the ruined fighters. Even before it was completely down, the ramp dropped and began disgorging stormtroopers.

 Luke watched as they split up and headed off to search the two ships, the strangeness of the whole situation adding an unreal tinge to the scene. There, less than twenty meters away, was Mara's golden opportunity to turn him over to the Imperials... and yet, here they both lay, hiding behind a tree root and trying not to breathe too loudly. Had she suddenly changed her mind?

 Or was it simply that she didn't want any witnesses nearby when she killed him?

 In which case, Luke realized abruptly, his best chance might actually be to find some way of surrendering to the stormtroopers. Once away from this planet, with the Force as his ally again, he would at least have a fighting chance. If he could just find a way to distract Mara long enough to get rid of her blaster...

 Lying pressed against his side, her arm slung across his shoulders, she must have sensed the sudden tensing of muscles. "Whatever you're thinking about trying, don't," she breathed in his ear, digging her blaster a little harder into his skin. "I can easily claim you were holding me prisoner out here and that I managed to snatch the blaster away from you."

 Luke swallowed, and settled in to wait.

 The wait wasn't very long. Two groups of stormtroopers disappeared into the fighters, while the rest walked around the edge of the newly created clearing, probing with eyes and portable sensors into the forest. After a few minutes those inside the fighters emerged, and what seemed to be a short meeting was held between them at the base of the shuttle ramp. At an inaudible command the outer ring of searchers came back in to join them, and the whole crowd trooped into their ship. The ramp sealed, and the shuttle disappeared once more into the sky, leaving nothing but the hum of its repulsorlifts behind. A minute later, even that was gone.

 Luke got his hands under him, started to get up. "Well"

 He broke off at another jab of the blaster. "Quiet," Mara muttered. "They'll have left a sensor behind, just in case someone comes back."

 Luke frowned. "How do you know?"

 "Because that's standard stormtrooper procedure in a case like this," she growled. "Real quiet, now; we get up and grab some more distance. And keep the droid quiet, too."

 They were completely out of sight of the wrecked fighters, and probably another fifty meters past that, before she called a halt. "What now?" Luke asked.

 "We sit down," she told him.

 Luke nodded and eased to the ground. "Thank you for not turning me in to the stormtroopers."

 "Save it," she said shortly, sitting down carefully herself and laying her blaster on the ground beside her. "Don't worry, there wasn't anything altruistic about it. The incoming shuttles must have seen us and sent a group over to investigate. Karrde's going to have to spin them some sort of sugar story about what happened, and I can't just walk into their arms until I know what that story is." She set the small flat box on her lap and opened it.

 "You could call him," Luke reminded her.

 "I could also call the Imperials directly and save myself some time," she retorted. "Unless you don't think they've got the equipment to monitor anything I send. Now shut up; I've got work to do."

 For a few minutes she worked at the flat box in silence, fiddling with a tiny keyboard and frowning at something Luke couldn't see from his angle. At irregular intervals she looked up, apparently to make sure he wasn't trying anything. Luke waited; and abruptly she grunted in satisfaction. "Three days," she said aloud, closing the box.

 "Three days to what?" Luke asked.

 "The edge of the forest," she told him, gazing at him with unblinking eyes. "Civilization. Well, Hyllyard City, anyway, which is about as close as this part of the planet gets to it."

 "And how many of us will be going there?" Luke asked quietly.

 "That's the question, isn't it?" she agreed, her tone icy. "Can you give me any reason why I should bother taking you along?"

 "Sure." Luke inclined his head to the side. "Artoo."

 "Don't be absurd." Her eyes flicked to the droid, back at Luke, "Whatever happens, the droid stays here. In pieces."

 Luke stared at her. "Inpieces? "

 "What, you need it spelled out?" she retorted. "The droid knows too much. We can't leave it here for the stormtroopers to find."

 "Knows too much about what?"

 "You, of course. You, Karrde, methis whole stupid mess." Artoo moaned softly. "He won't tell them anything," Luke insisted.

 "Not after it's in pieces, no," Mara agreed.

 With an effort, Luke forced himself to calm down. Logic, not fervor, was the only way to change her mind. "We need him," he told her. "You told me yourself the forest was dangerous. Artoo has sensors that can spot predators before they get close enough to strike."

 "Maybe; maybe not," she countered. "The vegetation here limits sensor ranges down to practically zero."

 "It'll still be better than you or I could do," Luke said. "And he'll also be able to watch while we're sleeping."

 She raised her eyebrows slightly."We?"

 "We," Luke said. "I don't think he'll be willing to protect you unless I'm along."

 Mara shook her head. "No good," she said, picking up her blaster. "I can get along without him. And I certainly don't need you."

 Luke felt his throat tighten. "Are you sure you're not letting your emotions get in the way of your judgment?" he asked.

 He hadn't thought her eyes could get any harder than they already were. He was wrong. "Let me tell you something, Skywalker," she said in a voice almost too soft for him to hear. "I've wanted to kill you for a long time. I dreamed about your death every night for most of that first year. Dreamed it, plotted itI must have run through a thousand scenarios, trying to find exactly the right way to do it. You can call it a cloud on my judgment if you want to; I'm used to it by now. It's the closest thing I've got a permanent companion."

 Luke looked back into those eyes, shaken right down to the core of his soul. "What did I do to you?" he whispered.

 "You destroyed my life," she said bitterly. "It's only fair that I destroy yours."

 "Will killing me bring your old life back?"

 "You know better than that," she said, her voice trembling slightly. "But it's still something I have to do. For myself, and for" She broke off.

 "What about Karrde?" Luke asked. "What about him?"

 "I thought he still wanted me kept alive."

 She snorted. "We all want things we can't have."

 But for just a second, there was something in her eyes. Something else that had flickered through the hatred...

 But whatever it was, it wasn't enough. "I almost wish I could drag it out a little more," she said, glacially calm again as she lifted the blaster. "But I don't have the time to spare."

 Luke stared at the muzzle of her blaster, his mind frantically searching for inspiration... "Wait a minute," he said suddenly. "You said you needed to find out what Karrde had told the Imperials. What if I could get you a secure comm channel to him?"

 The muzzle of the blaster wavered. "How?" she asked suspiciously.

 Luke nodded toward her survival kit. "Does the communicator in there have enough range to reach back to the base? I mean, without satellite boosting or anything."

 She was still looking suspicious. "There's a sonde balloon included that can take the antenna high enough to get past most of the forest damping. But it's nondirectional, which means the Imperials and anyone else in this hemisphere will be able to listen in."

 "That's okay," Luke said. "I can encrypt it so that no one else will be able to get anything out of it. Or rather, Artoo can."

 Mara smiled thinly. "Wonderful. Except for one minor detail: if the encrypt is that good, how is Karrde supposed to decrypt it?"

 "He won't have to," Luke told her. "The computer in my X-wing will do it for him."

 The thin smile vanished from Mara's face. "You're stalling," she snarled. "You can't do a counterpart encrypt between an astromech droid and a ship computer."

 "Why not? Artoo's the only droid who's worked with that computer in more than five years, with close to three thousand hours of flight time. He's bound to have molded it to his own personality by now. In fact, I know he hasthe ground maintenance people have to run diagnostics through him to make any sense out of them."

 "I thought standard procedure was to wipe and reload droid memories every six months to keep that from happening."

 "I like Artoo the way he is," Luke said. "And he and the X-wing work better together this way."

 "How much better?"

 Luke searched his memory. Maintenance had run that test just a few months ago. "I don't remember the exact number. It was something like thirty percent faster than a baseline astromech/X-wing interface. Maybe thirty-five."

 Mara was staring hard at Artoo. "That's counterpart-level speed, all right," she agreed reluctantly. "The Imperials could still crack it, though."

 "Eventually. But it would take some specialized equipment to do it. And you said yourself we'd be out of here in three days."

 For a long minute she stared at him, her jaw tight with clenched teeth, her face a mirror of fiercely battling emotions. Bitterness, hatred, desire for survival... and something else. Something that Luke could almost believe might be a touch of loyalty. "Your ship's sitting all alone out in the forest," she growled at last. "How are you going to get the message back to Karrde?"

 "Someone's bound to check on the ship eventually," he pointed out. "All we have to do is dump the message into storage and leave some kind of signal flashing that it's there. You have people who know how to pull a dump, don't you?"

 "Any idiot knows how to pull a dump." Mara glared at him. "Funny, isn't it, how this scheme justhappens to require that I keep both of you alive a while longer."

 Luke remained silent, meeting that bitter gaze without flinching... and then, abruptly, Mara's internal battle seemed to end. "What about the droid?" she demanded. "It'll take forever to get it across this terrain."

 "Artoo's made it through forests before. However..." Luke looked around, spotted a tree with two low branches just the right size. "I should be able to rig up a dragging frame to carry him ona travois, or something like that." He started to get up. "If you'll give me my lightsaber for a minute I can cut a couple of those branches off."

 "Sit down," she ordered, standing up. "I'll do it."

 Well, it had been worth a try. "Those two," he told her, pointing. "Be carefullightsabers are tricky to handle."

 "Your concern for my welfare is touching," she said, her voice dripping sarcasm. She drew the lightsaber and stepped over to the indicated tree, keeping an eye on Luke the whole time. She raised the weapon, ignited it

 And in a handful of quick, sure swipes trimmed, shortened, and cut the branches from the tree.

 She closed down the weapon and returned it to her belt in a single smooth motion. "Help yourself," she said, moving away.

 "Right," Luke said mechanically, his mind tingling with astonishment as he stumbled over to collect the branches. The way she'd done that... "You've used a lightsaber before."

 She gazed at him coldly. "Just so you know I can handle it. In case you should feel tempted to try and make a grab for my blaster." She glanced upward at the darkening sky. "Come onget busy with that travois. We'll need to find some kind of clearing to put the sonde balloon up, and I want to get that done before nightfall."

 

 Chapter 24

 "I must apologize for chasing you out like that," Karrde said as he walked Han toward the central building. "Particularly in the middle of a meal. Not exactly the sort of hospitality we strive for here."

 "No problem," Han told him, eyeing him as best he could in the gathering dusk. The light from the building ahead was casting a faint glow on Karrde's face; with luck, it would be enough to read the other's expression by. "What was that all about, anyway?"

 "Nothing serious," Karrde assured him easily. "Some people with whom I've had business dealings wanted to come and look the place over."

 "Ah," Han said. "So you're working directly for the Empire now?"

 Karrde's expression cracked, just a little. Han expected him to make some sort of reflexive denial; instead, he stopped and turned to look at Lando and Ghent, walking behind them. "Ghent?" he asked mildly.

 "I'm sorry, sir," the kid said, sounding miserable. "They insisted on coming out to see what was happening."

 "I see." Karrde looked back at Han, his face calm again. "No harm done, probably. Not the wisest of risks to take, though."

 "I'm used to taking risks," Han told him. "You haven't answered my question."

 Karrde resumed walking. "If I'm not interested in working for the Republic, I'm certainly not interested in working for the Empire. The Imperials have been coming here for the past few weeks to collect ysalamirisessile creatures, like the ones hanging onto the tree in the greatroom. I offered my assistance in helping them safely remove the ysalamiri from their trees."

 "What did you get in return?"

 "The privilege of watching them work," Karrde said. "Giving me that much extra information to try to figure out what they wanted with the things."

 "And whatdid they want with them?"

 Karrde glanced at Han. "Information costs money here, Solo. Actually, to be perfectly honest, we don't know what they're up to. We're working on it, though."

 "I see. But youdo know their commander personally."

 Karrde smiled faintly. "That's information again."

 Han was starting to get sick of this. "Have it your way. What'll this Grand Admiral's name cost me?"

 "For the moment, the name's not for sale," he told Han. "Perhaps we'll talk about it later."

 "Thanks, but I don't think there's going to be a later," Han growled, stopping. "If you don't mind, we'll just say our goodbyes here and get back to the ship."

 Karrde turned to him in mild surprise. "You're not going to finish our dinner? You hardly had a chance to get started."

 Han looked him straight in the eye. "I don't especially like sitting on the ground like a practice target when there are stormtroopers wandering around," he said bluntly.

 Karrde's face hardened. "At the moment, sitting on the ground is preferable to drawing attention in the air," he said coldly. "The Star Destroyer hasn't left orbit yet. Lifting off now would be an open invitation for them to swat you down."

 "TheFalcon 's outrun Star Destroyers before," Han countered. But Karrde had a point... and the fact that he hadn't turned the two of them over to the Imperials probably meant that he could be trusted, at least for now. Probably.

 On the other hand, if theydid stay... "But I suppose it wouldn't hurt us to stick around a little longer," he conceded. "All right, sure, we'll finish dinner."

 "Good," Karrde said. "It will just take a few minutes to get things put back together."

 "You took everything apart?" Lando asked.

 "Everything that might have indicated we had guests," Karrde said. "The Grand Admiral is highly observant, and I wouldn't have put it past him to know exactly how many of my associates are staying here at the moment."

 "Well, while you're getting things ready," Han said, "I want to go back to the ship and check on a couple of things."

 Karrde's eyes narrowed slightly. "But youwill be back."

 Han gave him an innocent smile. "Trust me."

 Karrde gazed at him a moment longer, then shrugged. "Very well. Watch yourselves, though. The local predators don't normally come this close in to our encampment, but there are exceptions."

 "We'll be careful," Han promised. "Come on, Lando."

 They headed back the way they'd come. "So what did we forget to do back at theFalcon ?" Lando asked quietly as they reached the trees.

 "Nothing," Han murmured back. "I just thought it'd be a good time to go check out Karrde's storage sheds. Particularly the one that was supposed to have a prisoner in it."

 They went about five meters into the forest, then changed direction to circle the compound. A quarter of the way around the circle, they found a likely looking group of small buildings.

 "Look for a door with a lock," Lando suggested as they came out among the sheds. "Either permanent or temporary."

 "Right." Han peered through the darkness. "That one over therethe one with two doors?"

 "Could be," Lando agreed. "Let's take a look."

 The left-most of the two doors did indeed have a lock. Or, rather, it hadhad a lock. "It's been shot off," Lando said, poking at it with a finger. "Strange."

 "Maybe the prisoner had friends," Han suggested, glancing around. There was no one else in sight. "Let's go inside."

 They slid the door open and went in, closing it behind them before turning on the light. The shed was less than half full, with most of the boxes piled against the right-hand wall. The exceptions to that rule...

 Han stepped over for a closer look. "Well, well," he murmured, gazing at the removed power outlet plate and the wires poking through the gap. "Someone's been busy over here."

 "Someone's been even busier over here," Lando commented from behind him. "Come have a look."

 Lando was crouched down beside the door, peering into the inside of the door lock mechanism. Like the outside, half of its covering plate had been blasted off. "That must have been one beaut of a shot," Han frowned, coming over.

 "It wasn't a single shot," Lando said, shaking his head. "The stuff in between is mostly intact." He pushed back the cover a little, poking at the electronics inside with his fingers. "Looks like our mysterious prisoner was tampering with the equipment."

 "I wonder how he got it open." Han glanced back at the removed power plate. "I'm going to take a look next door," he told Lando, stepping back to the entrance and tapping the release.

 The door didn't open. "Uh-oh," he muttered, trying again.

 "Wait a secondI see the problem," Lando said, fiddling with something behind the plate. "There's a power supply been half spliced into the works..."

 Abruptly, the door slid open. "Back in a second," Han told him, and slipped outside.

 The shed's right-hand room wasn't much different from the other one. Except for one thing: in the center, in a space that had very obviously been cleared for the purpose, lay an open droid restraint collar.

 Han frowned down at it. The collar hadn't been properly put away, or even closed againhardly the way someone in an organization like Karrde's would be expected to take care of company equipment. Roughly in the center of the collar's open jaws were three faint marks on the floor. Skid marks, he decided, formed by the restrained droid's attempts to move or get free.

 Behind him, the door whispered open. Han spun around, blaster in hand

 "You seem to have gotten lost," Karrde said calmly. His eyes flicked around the room. "And to have lost General Calrissian along the way."

 Han lowered the blaster. "You need to tell your people to put their toys away when they're done," he said, nodding his head at the abandoned restraint collar. "You were holding a droid prisoner, too?"

 Karrde smiled thinly. "I see Ghent was talking out of turn again. Amazing, isn't it, how so many expert slicers know everything about computers and droids and yet don't know when to keep their mouths shut."

 "It's also amazing how so many expert smugglers don't know when to leave a messy deal alone," Han shot back. "So what's your Grand Admiral got you doing? Formal slaving, or just random kidnappings?"

 Karrde's eyes flashed. "I don't deal in slaves, Solo. Slavesor kidnapping. Never."

 "What was this one, then? An accident?"

 "I didn't ask for him to come into my life," Karrde countered. "Nor did I especially want him there."

 Han snorted. "You're stretching, Karrde. What'd he do, drop in out of the sky on top of you?"

 "As a matter of fact, that's very nearly the way it happened," Karrde said stiffly.

 "Oh, well, that's a good reason to lock someone up," Han said sardonically. "Who was he?"

 "That information's not for sale."

 "Maybe we don't need to buy it," Lando said from behind him.

 Karrde turned. "Ah," he said as Lando stepped past him into the room. "There you are. Exploring the other half of the shed, were you?"

 "Yeah, we don't stay lost very long," Han assured him. "What'd you find, Lando?"

 "This." Lando held up a tiny red cylinder with a pair of wires coming out of each end. "It's a micrel power supplythe kind used for low-draw applications. Our prisoner wired it into the door lock control after the power lines had been burned awaythat's how he got out." He moved it a little closer. "The manufacturer's logo is small, but readable. Recognize it?"

 Han squinted at it. The script was alien, but it seemed vaguely familiar. "I've seen it before, but I don't remember where."

 "You saw it during the war," Lando told him, his gaze steady on Karrde. "It's the logo of the Sibha Habadeet."

 Han stared at the tiny cylinder, a strange chill running through him. The Sibha Habadeet had been one of the Alliance's major suppliers of micrel equipment. And their specialty had been "That's a bioelectronic power supply?"

 "That's right," Lando said grimly. "Just like the kind that would have been put in, say, an artificial hand."

 Slowly, the muzzle of Han's blaster came up again to point at Karrde's stomach. "There was a droid in here," he told Lando. "The skid marks on the floor look just about right for an R2 unit." He raised his eyebrows. "Feel free to join the conversation anytime, Karrde."

 Karrde sighed, his face a mixture of annoyance and resignation. "What do you want me to say?that Luke Skywalker was a prisoner here? All rightconsider it said."

 Han felt his jaw tighten. And he and Lando had been right here. Blissfully unaware... "Where is he now?" he demanded.

 "I thought Ghent would have told you," Karrde said darkly. "He escaped in one of my Skipray blastboats." His lips twisted. "Crashing it in the process."

 "Hewhat? "

 "He's all right," Karrde assured him. "Or at least he was a couple of hours ago. The stormtroopers who went to investigate said that both wrecks were deserted." His eyes seemed to flatten, just for a minute. "I hope that means they're working together to make their way out."

 "You don't sound sure of that," Han prompted.

 The eyes flattened a little more. "Mara Jade was the one who went after him. She has a certainwell, why mince words. In point of fact, she wants very much to kill him."

 Han threw a startled glance at Lando. "Why?"

 Karrde shook his head. "I don't know."

 For a moment the room was silent. "How did he get here?" Lando asked.

 "As I said, purely by accident," Karrde said. "NoI take that back. It wasn't an accident for Marashe led us directly to his crippled starfighter."

 "How?"

 "Again, I don't know." He fixed Han with a hard look. "And before you ask, we had nothing to do with the damage to his ship. He'd burned out both hyperdrive motivators tangling with one of the Empire's Star Destroyers. If we hadn't picked him up, he'd almost certainly be dead by now."

 "Instead of roaming a forest with someone who still wants him that way," Han countered. "Yeah, you're a real hero."

 The hard look hardened even further. "The Imperials want Skywalker, Solo. They want him very badly. If you look carefully, you'll notice that Ididn't give him to them."

 "Because he escaped first."

 "He escaped because he was in this shed," Karrde retorted. "And he was in this shed because I didn't want the Imperials stumbling over him during their unannounced visit."

 He paused. "You'll also notice," he added quietly, "that I didn't turn the two ofyou over to them, either."

 Slowly, Han lowered the blaster. Anything said at the point of a gun was of course suspect; but the fact that Karrde had indeed not betrayed them to the Imperials was a strong argument in his favor.

 Or rather, he hadn't betrayed them yet. That could always change. "I want to see Luke's X-wing," he told Karrde.

 "Certainly," Karrde said. "I'd recommend not going there until tomorrow morning, though. We moved it somewhat farther into the forest than your ship; and therewill be predators roaming around it in the darkness."

 Han hesitated, then nodded. If Karrde had something subtle going here, he almost certainly would have already erased or altered the X-wing's computer log. A few more hours wouldn't make any difference. "All right. So what are we going to do about Luke?"

 Karrde shook his head, his gaze not quite focused on Han. "There's nothing we can do for them tonight. Not with vornskrs roaming the forest and the Grand Admiral still in orbit. Tomorrow... We'll have to discuss it, see what we can come up with." His focus came back, and with it a slightly ironic smile. "In the meantime, dinner should be ready by now. If you'll follow me...?"

 

 The dimly lit holographic art gallery had changed again, this time to a collection of remarkably similar flame-shaped works that seemed to pulsate and alter in form as Pellaeon moved carefully between the pedestals. He studied them as he walked, wondering where this batch had come from. "Have you found them, Captain?" Thrawn asked as Pellaeon reached the double display circle.

 He braced himself. "I'm afraid not, sir. We'd hoped that with the arrival of local nightfall we'd be able to get some results from the infrared sensors. But they don't seem able to penetrate the tree canopy, either."

 Thrawn nodded. "What about that pulse transmission we picked up just after sundown?"

 "We were able to confirm that it originated from the approximate location of the crash site," Pellaeon told him. "But it was too brief for a precise location check. The encrypt on it is a very strange oneDecrypt thinks it might be a type of counterpart coding. They're still working on it."

 "They've tried all the known Rebellion encrypts, I presume."

 "Yes, sir, as per your orders."

 Thrawn nodded thoughtfully. "It looks like we're at something of a stalemate, then, Captain. At least as long as they're in the forest. Have you calculated their likely emergence points?"

 "There's really only one practical choice," Pellaeon said, wondering why they were making so much of a fuss over this. "A town called Hyllyard City, on the edge of the forest and almost directly along their path. It's the only population center anywhere for more than a hundred kilometers. With only the one survival pack between them, they almost have to come out there."

 "Excellent," Thrawn nodded. "I want you to detail three squads of stormtroopers to set up an observation post there. They're to assemble and depart ship immediately."

 Pellaeon blinked. "Stormtroopers, sir?"

 "Stormtroopers," Thrawn repeated, turning his gaze to one of the flame sculptures. "Better add half a biker scout unit, too, and three Chariot light assault vehicles."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said cautiously. Stormtroopers were in critically short supply these days. To waste them like this, on something so utterly unimportant as a smuggler squabble...

 "Karrde lied to us, you see," Thrawn continued, as if reading Pellaeon's mind. "Whatever that little drama was this afternoon, it was not the common pursuit of a common thief. I'd like to know what, in fact, it was."

 "I... don't think I follow, sir."

 "It's very simple, Captain," Thrawn said, in that tone of voice he always seemed to use when explaining the obvious. "The pilot of the chase vehicle never reported in during the pursuit. Nor did anyone from Karrde's base communicate with him. We know thatwe'd have intercepted any such transmissions. No progress reports; no assistance requests; nothing but complete radio silence." He looked back at Pellaeon. "Speculation, Captain?"

 "Whatever it was," Pellaeon said slowly, "it was something they didn't want us knowing about. Beyond that..." He shook his head. "I don't know, sir. There could be any number of things they wouldn't want outsiders to know about. Theyare smugglers, after all."

 "Agreed." Thrawn's eyes seemed to glitter. "But now consider the additional fact that Karrde refused our invitation to join in the search for Skywalker... and the fact that this afternoon he implied the search was over." He raised an eyebrow. "What doesthat suggest to you, Captain?"

 Pellaeon felt his jaw drop. "You mean... that wasSkywalker in that Skipray?"

 "An interesting speculation, isn't it?" Thrawn agreed. "Unlikely, I'll admit. But likely enough to be worth following up on."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon glanced at the chrono, did a quick calculation. "Though if we stay here more than another day or two, we may have to move back the Sluis Van attack."

 "We're not moving Sluis Van," Thrawn said emphatically. "Our entire victory campaign against the Rebellion begins there, and I'll not have so complex and far-reaching a schedule altered. Not for Skywalker; not for anyone else." He nodded at the flame statues surrounding them. "Sluissi art clearly indicates a biannual cyclic pattern, and I want to hit them at their most sluggish point. We'll leave for our rendezvous with theInexorable and the cloaking shield test as soon as the troops and vehicles have been dropped. Three squads of stormtroopers should be adequate to handle Skywalker, if he is indeed here."

 His eyes bored into Pellaeon's face. "And to handle Karrde," he added softly, "if he turns out to be a traitor."

 

 The last bits of dark blue had faded from the tiny gaps in the canopy overhead, leaving nothing but blackness above them. Turning the survival kit's worklight to its lowest setting, Mara set it down and sank gratefully to the ground against a large tree bole. Her right ankle, twisted somehow in the Skipray crash, had started to ache again, and it felt good to get the weight off it.

 Skywalker was already stretched out a couple of meters on the other side of the worklight, his head pillowed on his tunic, his loyal droid standing at his side. She wondered if he'd guessed about the ankle, dismissed the question as irrelevant. She'd had worse injuries without being slowed down by them.

 "Reminds me of Endor," Skywalker said quietly as Mara arranged her glow rod and blaster in her lap where they'd be accessible. "A forest always sounds so busy at night."

 "Oh, it's busy, all right," Mara grunted. "A lot of the animals here are nocturnal. Including the vornskrs."

 "Strange," he murmured. "Karrde's pet vornskrs seemed wide enough awake in late afternoon."

 She looked across at him, mildly surprised he'd noticed that. "Actually, even in the wild they take small naps around the clock," she said. "I call them nocturnal because they do most of their hunting at night."

 Skywalker mulled that over for a moment. "Maybe we ought to travel at night, then," he suggested. "They'll be hunting us either wayat least then we'd be awake and alert while they were on the prowl."

 Mara shook her head. "It'd be more trouble than it's worth. We need to be able to see the terrain as far ahead of us as possible if we're going to avoid running into dead ends. Besides, this whole forest is dotted with small clearings."

 "Through which a glow rod beam would show very clearly to an orbiting ship," he conceded. "Point. You seem to know a lot about this place."

 "It wouldn't take more than an observant pilot flying over the forest to see that," she growled. But he was right, she knew, as she eased back against the rough bark.Know your territory was the first rule that had been drilled into her... and the first thing she'd done after establishing herself in Karrde's organization had been to do precisely that. She'd studied the aerial maps of the forest and surrounding territory; had taken long walks, in both daylight and at night, to familiarize herself with the sights and sounds; had sought out and killed several vornskrs and other predators to learn the fastest ways of taking them down; had even talked one of Karrde's people into running bio tests on a crateload of native plants to find out which were edible and which weren't. Outside the forest, she knew something about the settlers, understood the local politics, and had stashed a small but adequate part of her earnings out where she could get hold of it.

 More than anyone else in Karrde's organization, she was equipped to survive outside the confines of his encampment. So why was she trying so hard to get back there?

 It wasn't for Karrde's sakethat much she was sure of. All that he'd done for herher job, her position, her promotionsshe'd more than repaid with hard work and good service. She didn't owe him anything, any more than he owed her. Whatever the story was he'd concocted this afternoon to explain the Skipray chase to Thrawn, it would have been designed to protect his own neck, not hers; and if he saw that the Grand Admiral wasn't buying it, he was at perfect liberty to pull his group off Myrkr tonight and disappear down one of the other ratholes he had scattered throughout the galaxy.

 Except that he wouldn't. He would sit there, sending out search party after search party, and wait for Mara to come out of the forest. Even if she never did.

 Even if by doing so he overstayed Thrawn's patience.

 Mara clenched her teeth, the unpleasant image of Karrde pinned against a cell wall by an interrogation droid dancing in front of her eyes. Because she knew Thrawnknew the Grand Admiral's tenacity and the limits of his patience both. He would wait and watch, or set someone to do it for him, and follow through on Karrde's story.

 And if neither she nor Skywalker ever reappeared from the forest, he would almost certainly jump to the wrong conclusion. At which point he would take Karrde in for a professional Imperial interrogation, and eventually would find out who the escaping prisoner had been.

 And then he'd have Karrde put to death.

 Across from her, the droid's dome rotated a few degrees and it gave a quietly insistent gurgle. "I think Artoo's picked up something," Skywalker said, hiking himself up on his elbows.

 "No kidding," Mara said. She picked up her glow rod, pointed it at the shadow she'd already seen moving stealthily toward them, and flicked it on.

 A vornskr stood framed in the circle of light, its front claws dug into the ground, its whip tail pointed stiffly back and waving slowly up and down. It paid no attention to the light, but continued moving slowly toward Skywalker.

 Mara let it get another two paces, then shot it neatly through the head.

 The beast collapsed to the ground, its tail giving one last spasmodic twitch before doing likewise. Mara gave the rest of the area a quick sweep with the glow rod, then flicked it off. "Awfully good thing we have your droid's sensors along," she said sarcastically into the relative darkness.

 "Well,I wouldn't have known there was any danger without him," Skywalker came back wryly. "Thank you."

 "Forget it," she grunted.

 There was a short silence. "Are Karrde's pet vornskrs a different species?" Skywalker asked. "Or did he have their tails removed?"

 Mara peered across the gloom at him, impressed in spite of herself. Most men staring down a vornskr's gullet wouldn't have noticed a detail like that. "The latter," she told him. "They use those tails as whipspretty painful, and there's a mild poison in them, too. At first it was just that Karrde didn't want his people walking around with whip welts all over them; we found out later that removing the tails also kills a lot of their normal hunting aggression."

 "They seemed pretty domestic," he agreed. "Even friendly."

 Only they hadn't been friendly to Skywalker, she remembered. And here, the vornskr had ignored her and gone directly for him. Coincidence? "They are," she said aloud. "He's thought occasionally about offering them for sale as guard animals. Never gotten around to exploring the potential market."

 "Well, you can tell him I'd be glad to serve as a reference," Skywalker said dryly. "Having looked a vornskr square in the teeth, I can tell you it's not something the average intruder would like to do twice."

 Her lip twisted. "Get used to it," she advised him. "It's a long way to the edge of the forest."

 "I know." Skywalker lay back down again. "Fortunately, you seem to be an excellent shot."

 He fell silent. Getting ready to sleep... and probably assuming she was going to do the same.

 Wish away,she thought sardonically at him. Reaching into her pocket, she pulled out the survival kit's tube of stimpills. A steady stream of the things could ruin one's health in short order, but going to sleep five meters away from an enemy would ruin it a lot faster.

 She paused, tube in hand, and frowned at Skywalker. At his closed eyes and calm, apparently totally unworried face. Which seemed strange, because if anyone had ever had reason to be worried, it was he. Stripped of all his vaunted Jedi powers by a planetful of ysalamiri, trapped in a forest on a world whose name and location he didn't even know, with her, the Imperials, and the vornskrs lining up for the privilege of killing himhe should by rights be wide-eyed with pumping adrenaline by now.

 Maybe he was just faking it, hoping she would lower her guard. It was probably something she would try, under reversed circumstances.

 But then, maybe there was more to him than met the eye. More than just a family name, a political position, and a bag of Jedi tricks.

 Her mouth tightened, and she ran her fingers along the side of the lightsaber hanging from her belt. Yes, of course there was more there. Whatever had happened at the endat that terrible, confused, life-destroying endit hadn't been his Jedi tricks that had saved him. It had been something else. Something she would make sure to find out from him before his own end came.

 She thumbed a stimpill from the tube and swallowed it, a fresh determination surging through her as she did so. No, the vornskrs weren't going to get Luke Skywalker. And neither were the Imperials. When the time came, she would kill him herself. It was her right, and her privilege, and her duty.

 Shifting to a more comfortable position against her tree, she settled in to wait out the night.

 

 The nighttime sounds of the forest came faintly from the distance, mixed in with the faint sounds of civilization from the building at his back. Karrde sipped at his cup, gazing into the darkness, feeling fatigue tugging at him as he'd seldom felt it before.

 In a single day, his whole life had just been turned over.

 Beside him, Drang raised his head and turned it to the right. "Company?" Karrde asked him, looking in that direction. A shadowy figure, hardly visible in the starlight, was moving toward him. "Karrde?" Aves's voice called softly.

 "Over here," Karrde told him. "Go get a chair and join me."

 "This is okay," Aves said, coming over beside him and sitting down cross-legged on the ground. "I've got to get back to Central pretty soon, anyway."

 "The mystery message?"

 "Yeah. What in the worlds was Mara thinking of?"

 "I don't know," Karrde admitted. "Something clever, though."

 "Probably," Aves conceded. "I just hope we're going to be clever enough to decrypt it."

 Karrde nodded. "Did Solo and Calrissian get bedded down all right?"

 "They went back to their ship," Aves said, his voice scowling. "I don't think they trust us."

 "Under the circumstances, you can hardly blame them." Karrde reached down to scratch Drang's head. "Maybe pulling Skywalker's computer logs tomorrow morning will help convince them we're on their side."

 "Yeah. Are we?"

 Karrde pursed his lips. "We don't really have a choice anymore, Aves. They're our guests."

 Aves umphed. "The Grand Admiral isn't going to be happy."

 Karrde shrugged. "They're our guests," he repeated.

 In the darkness, he sensed Aves shrug back. He understood, Aves didunderstood the requirements and duties of a host. Unlike Mara, who'd wanted him to send theMillennium Falcon away.

 He wished now that he'd listened to her. Wished it very much indeed.

 "I'll want you to organize a search party for tomorrow morning," he told Aves. "Probably futile, all things considered, but it has to be tried."

 "Right. Do we defer to the Imperials in that regard?"

 Karrde grimaced to himself. "I doubt if they'll be doing any more searching. That ship that sneaked out from the Star Destroyer an hour ago looked suspiciously like a stripped-down assault shuttle. My guess is that they'll set up in Hyllyard City and wait for Mara and Skywalker to come to them."

 "Sounds reasonable," Aves said. "What if we don't get to them first?"

 "We'll just have to take them away from the stormtroopers, I suppose. Think you can put a team together for the purpose?"

 Aves snorted gently. "Easier done than said. I've sat in on a couple of conversations since you made the announcement, and I can tell you that feelings in camp are running pretty strong. Hero of the Rebellion and all that aside, a bunch of our people figure they owe Skywalker big for getting them out of permanent hock to Jabba the Hutt."

 "I know," Karrde said grimly. "And all that warm enthusiasm could be a problem. Because if we can't get Skywalker free from the Imperials... well, we can't let them have him alive."

 There was a long silence from the shadow beside him. "I see," Aves said at last, very quietly. "It probably won't make any difference, you know, in what Thrawn suspects."

 "Suspicion is better than unequivocal proof," Karrde reminded him. "And if we can't intercept them while they're still in the forest, it may be the best we're going to get."

 Aves shook his head. "I don't like it."

 "Neither do I. But we need to be prepared for every eventuality."

 "Understood." For another moment Aves sat there in silence. Then, with a grunted sigh, he stood up. "I'd better get back, see if Ghent's made any progress on Mara's message."

 "And after that you'd better hit the sack," Karrde told him. "Tomorrow's going to be a busy day."

 "Right. Good night."

 Aves left, and once again the soft mixture of forest sounds filled the night air. Sounds that meant a great deal to the creatures who made them but nothing at all to him.

 Meaningless sounds...

 He shook his head tiredly. Whathad Mara been trying to do with that opaque message of hers? Was it something simplesomething that he or someone else here ought to be able to decrypt with ease?

 Or had the lady who always played the sabacc cards close to her chest finally outsmarted herself?

 In the distance, a vornskr emitted its distinctive cackle/purr. Beside his chair, Drang lifted his head. "Friend of yours?" Karrde inquired mildly, listening as another vornskr echoed the first's cry. Sturm and Drang had been wild like that once, before they'd been domesticated.

 Just like Mara had been, when he'd first taken her in. He wondered if she would ever be similarly tamed.

 Wondered if she would solve this whole problem by killing Skywalker first.

 The cackle/purr came again, closer this time. "Come on, Drang," he told the vornskr, getting to his feet. "Time to go inside."

 He paused at the door to take one last look at the forest, a shiver of melancholy and something that felt disturbingly like fear running through him. No, the Grand Admiral wasn't going to be happy about this. Wasn't going to be happy at all.

 And one way or the other, Karrde knew that his life here was at an end.

 

 Chapter 25

 The room was quiet and dark, the faint nighttime sounds of Rwookrrorro floating in through the mesh window with the cool night breeze. Staring at the curtains, Leia gripped her blaster with a sweaty hand, and wondered what had awakened her.

 She lay there for several minutes, heart thudding in her chest. But there was nothing. No sounds, no movements, no threats that her limited Jedi senses could detect. Nothing but a creepy feeling in the back of her mind that she was no longer safe here. She took a deep breath, let it out silently as she continued to listen. It wasn't any fault of her hosts, or at least nothing she could blame them for. The city's leaders had been on incredibly tight alert the first couple of days, providing her with over a dozen Wookiee bodyguards while other volunteers combed through the city like hairy Imperial Walkers, searching for the alien she'd spotted that first day here. The whole thing had been carried out with a speed, efficiency, and thoroughness that Leia had seldom seen even in the top ranks of the Rebel Alliance.

 But as the days passed without anyone finding a trace of the alien, the alert had gradually softened. By the time the negative reports also began coming in from other Kashyyyk cities, the number of searchers had dwindled to a handful and the dozen bodyguards had been reduced to three.

 And now even those three were gone, returning to their regular jobs and lives. Leaving her with just Chewbacca, Ralrra, and Salporin to watch over her.

 It was a classic strategy. Lying alone in the dark, with the advantage of hindsight, she could see that. Sentient beings, human and Wookiee alike, simply could not maintain a continual state of vigilance when there was no visible enemy to be vigilant toward. It was a tendency they'd had to fight hard against in the Alliance.

 As they'd also had to fight against the too-often lethal inertia that seduced a person into staying too long in one place.

 She winced, memories of the near disaster on the ice world of Hoth coming back to haunt her. She and Chewbacca should have left Rwookrrorro days ago, she knew. Probably should have left Kashyyyk entirely, for that matter. The place had become too comfortable, too familiarher mind no longer reallysaw everything that went on around her, but merely saw some of it and filled in the rest from memory. It was the kind of psychological weakness that a clever enemy could easily exploit, simply by finding a way to fit himself into her normal routine.

 It was time for that routine to be broken.

 She peered over at the bedside chrono, did a quick calculation. About an hour until dawn. There was a repulsorlift sled parked just outside; if she and Chewbacca got going now, they should be able to get theLady Luck into space a little after sunrise. Sitting halfway up, she slid across the bed, set her blaster down on the nightstand, and picked up her comlink.

 And in the darkness, a sinewy hand reached out to seize her wrist.

 There was no time to think; but for that first half second there was no need. Even as her mind froze, stunned by the unexpectedness of the attack, old self-defense reflexes were already swinging into action. Falling away from her assailant, using the pull on her arm for balance, she swiveled on her hip, tucked her right leg under her, and kicked out with all her strength.

 The edge of her foot thudded against something unyieldingbody armor of some kind. Reaching back over her shoulder with her free hand, she grabbed the corner of her pillow and hurled it at the shadowy outline of his head.

 Under the pillow was her lightsaber.

 It was doubtful that he ever saw the blow coming. He was still in the process of scooping the pillow away from his face when the ignited lightsaber lit up the room. She got just a glimpse of huge black eyes and protruding jaw before the blazing blade sliced him almost in half.

 The grip on her arm was abruptly gone. Closing down the lightsaber, she rolled out of bed and back to her feet, igniting the weapon again as she looked around

 And with a sudden, numbing blow to her wrist, the lightsaber was knocked across the room. It shut down in midflight, plunging the room again into darkness.

 She dropped instantly into combat stance, but even as she did so she knew it was a useless gesture. The first alien had perhaps been lulled by the apparent helplessness of his victim; the second had obviously learned the lesson. She hadn't even turned all the way toward the attacker before her wrist was again captured and twisted around behind her. Another hand snaked around to cover her mouth, at the same time jamming her neck hard against the attacker's muzzle. One leg twined somehow around her knees, blocking any attempt she might make to kick him. She tried anyway, struggling to free at least one leg, while at the same time trying to get a clear shot at those eyes with her free hand. His breath was hot on her neck, and she could feel the shapes of needle teeth through the jaw skin pressing against her. The alien's body went abruptly rigid

 And suddenly, without any warning at all, she was free.

 She spun around to face the alien, fighting to regain her balance in the sudden loss of anything solid to lean against and wondering what this new game was he was playing. Her eyes searched frantically in the dim light, trying to locate the weapon he was surely now bringing to bear on her

 But there was no weapon pointed at her. The alien just stood there, his back to the door, his empty hands splayed off to the sides as if preparing to protect himself from a backwards fall."Mal'ary'ush," he hissed, his voice soft and gravelly. Leia took a step backwards, wondering if she could get to the window before he launched his next attack.

 The attack never came. Behind the alien, the door slammed open; and with a roar, Chewbacca boiled into the room.

 The attacker didn't turn. He made no move at all, in fact, as the Wookiee leaped toward him, massive hands reaching for his neck

 "Don't kill him!" Leia snapped.

 The words probably startled Chewbacca almost as much as they startled her. But the Wookiee's reflexes were equal to the task. Passing up the alien's throat, he swung a hand instead to cuff him solidly across the side of the head.

 The blow sent the alien flying halfway across the room and up against the wall. He slid down and remained still.

 "Come on," Leia said, rolling across her bed to retrieve her lightsaber. "There may be more of them."

 [Not any morre,] a Wookiee voice rumbled, and she looked up to see Ralrra leaning against the doorway. [The otherr three have been dealt with.]

 "Are you sure?" Leia asked, taking a step toward him. He was still leaning against the doorjamb

 Leaninghard against it, she suddenly realized. "You're hurt," she exclaimed, flicking on the room light and giving him a quick examination. There were no marks she could see. "Blaster?"

 [Stun weapon,] he corrected. [A quieterr weapon, but it was set too low forr Wookiees. I am only a little weak. Chewbacca it is who is wounded.]

 Startled, Leia looked over at Chewbacca... and for the first time saw the small patch of matted brown hair midway down his torso. "Chewie!" she breathed, starting toward him.

 He waved her away with an impatient growl. [He is right,] Ralrra agreed. [We must get you away from herre, beforre the second attack comes.]

 From somewhere outside a Wookiee began howling an alert. "There won't be a second attack," she told Ralrra. "They've been noticedthere'll be people converging on this house in minutes."

 [Not on this house,] Ralrra rumbled, a strange grimness to his voice. [Therre is a firre fourr houses away.]

 Leia stared at him, a chill running up her back. "A diversion," she murmured. "They set a house on fire to mask any alert you try to make."

 Chewbacca growled an affirmative. [We must get you away from herre,] Ralrra repeated, easing himself carefully upright.

 Leia glanced past him through the doorway to the darker hallway beyond, a strange dread suddenly twisting into her stomach. There had beenthree Wookiees in the house with her. "Where's Salporin?" she asked.

 Ralrra hesitated, just long enough for her suspicions to become a terrible certainty. [He did not survive the attack,] the Wookiee said, almost too softly for her to hear.

 Leia swallowed hard. "I'm sorry," she said, the words sounding painfully trite and meaningless in her ears.

 [As arre we. But the time forr mourning is not now.]

 Leia nodded, blinking back sudden tears as she turned to the window. She'd lost many friends and companions in the midst of battle through the years, and she knew that Ralrra was right. But all the logic in the universe didn't make it any easier.

 There were no aliens visible outside. But they were there that much she was sure of. Both of the previous teams she and Han had tangled with had consisted of considerably more than five members, and there was no reason to expect this one to be any different. Chances were that any attempt to escape overland would meet with a quick ambush.

 Worse, as soon as the hue and cry over the burning house really got going, the aliens could likely launch a second attack with impunity, counting on the commotion down the street to cover up any noise they made in the process.

 She glanced at the burning house, feeling a brief pang of guilt for the Wookiees who owned it. Resolutely, she forced the emotion out of her mind. There, too, there was nothing she could do for now. "The aliens seem to want me alive," she said, dropping the edge of the curtain and turning back to Chewbacca and Ralrra. "If we can get the sled into the sky, they probably won't try to shoot us down."

 [Do you trust the sled?] Ralrra asked pointedly.

 Leia stopped short, lips pressed tightly together in annoyance with herself. No, of course she didn't trust the sledthe first thing the aliens would have done would have been to disable any escape vehicle within reach. Disable it, or worse: they could have modified it to simply fly her directly into their arms.

 She couldn't stay put; she couldn't go sideways; and she couldn't go up. Which left exactly one direction.

 "I'll need some rope," she said, scooping up an armful of clothes and starting to get dressed. "Strong enough to hold my weight. As much as you've got."

 They were fast, all right. A quick glance between them [You cannot be serious,] Ralrra told her. [The dangerr would be great even forr a Wookiee. Forr a human it would be suicide.]

 "I don't think so," Leia shook her head, pulling on her boots. "I saw how the branches twist together, when we looked at the bottom of the city. It should be possible for me to climb along between them."

 [You will neverr reach the landing platform alone,] Ralrra objected. [We will come with you.]

 "You're in no shape to travel down the street, let alone underneath it," Leia countered bluntly. She picked up her blaster, bolstered it, and stepped to the doorway. "Neither is Chewbacca. Get out of my way, please."

 Ralrra didn't budge. [You do not fool us, Leiaorrganasolo. You believe that if we stay herre the enemy will follow you and leave us in peace.]

 Leia grimaced. So much for the quiet, noble self-sacrifice. "There's a good chance they will," she insisted. "It's me they want. And they want me alive."

 [Therre is no time to argue,] Ralrra said. [We will stay togetherr. Herre, orr underr the city.]

 Leia took a deep breath. She didn't like it, but it was clear she wasn't going to be able to talk them out of it. "All right, you win," she sighed. The alien Chewbacca had hit was still lying unconscious, and for a moment she debated whether or not they dared take the time to tie him up. The need for haste won. "Let's find some rope and get moving."

 And besides, a small voice in the back of her head reminded her, even if she went alone, the aliens might still attack the house. And might prefer leaving no witnesses behind.

 

 The flat, somewhat spongy material that formed the "ground" of Rwookrrorro was less than a meter thick. Leia's lightsaber cut through both it and the house's floor with ease, dropping a roughly square chunk between the braided branches to vanish into the darkness below.

 [I will go first,] Ralrra said, dropping into the hole before anyone could argue the point. He was still moving a little slowly, but at least the stun-induced dizzy spells seemed to have passed.

 Leia looked up as Chewbacca stepped close to her and flipped Ralrra's baldric around her shoulders. "Last chance to change your mind about this arrangement," she warned him.

 His answer was short and to the point. By the time Ralrra's quiet [All clearr] floated up, they were ready.

 And with Leia strapped firmly to his torso, Chewbacca eased his way through the hole.

 Leia had fully expected the experience to be unpleasant. She hadn't realized that it was going to be terrifying, as well. The Wookiees didn't crawl across the tops of the plaited branches, the way she'd anticipated doing. Instead, using the climbing claws she'd seen her first day here, they hung by all fours underneath the branches to travel.

 And then theytraveled .

 The side of her face pressed against Chewbacca's hairy chest, Leia clenched her teeth tightly together, partly to keep them from chattering with the bouncing, but mostly to keep moans of fear from escaping. It was like the acrophobia she'd felt in the liftcar, multiplied by a thousand. Here, there wasn't even a relatively thick vine between her and the nothingness belowonly Wookiee claws and the thin rope connecting them to another set of Wookiee claws. She wanted to say somethingto plead that they stop and at least belay the end of their rope to something solidbut she was afraid to make even a sound lest it break Chewbacca's concentration. The sound of his breathing was like the roar of a waterfall in her ears, and she could feel the warm wetness of his blood seeping through the thin material of her undertunic. How badly had he been hurt? Huddled against him, listening to his heart pounding, she was afraid to ask.

 Abruptly, he stopped.

 She opened her eyes, unaware until that moment that she'd closed them. "What's wrong?" she asked, her voice trembling.

 [The enemy has found us,] Ralrra growled softly from beside her.

 Bracing herself, Leia turned her head as far as she could, searching the dark predawn gray behind them. There it was: a small patch of darker black set motionlessly against it. A repulsorlift airspeeder of some kind, staying well back out of bowcaster range. "It couldn't be a Wookiee rescue ship, I don't suppose," she offered hopefully.

 Chewbacca growled the obvious flaw: the airspeeder wasn't showing even running lights. [Yet it does not approach,] Ralrra pointed out.

 "They want me alive," Leia said, more to reassure herself than to remind them. "They don't want to spook us." She looked around, searching the void around them and the matted branches above them for inspiration.

 And found it. "I need the rest of the rope," she told Ralrra, peering back at the hovering airspeeder. "All of it."

 Steeling herself, she twisted partway around in her makeshift harness, taking the coil he gave her and tying one end securely to one of the smaller branches. Chewbacca growled an objection. "No, I'm not belaying us," she assured him. "So don't fall. I've got something else in mind. Okay, let's go."

 They set off again, perhaps a shade faster than before... and as she bounced along against Chewbacca's torso, Leia realized with mild surprise that while she was still frightened, she was no longer terrified. Perhaps, she decided, because she was no longer simply a pawn or excess baggage, with her fate totally in the hands of Wookiees or gray-skinned aliens or the forces of gravity.She was now at least partially in control of what happened.

 They continued on, Leia playing out the rope as they traveled. The dark airspeeder followed, still without lights, still keeping well back from them. She kept an eye on it as they bounced along, knowing that the timing and distance on this were going to be crucial. Just a little bit farther...

 There were perhaps three meters of rope left in the coil. Quickly, she tied a firm knot and peered back at their pursuer. "Get ready," she said to Chewbacca. "Now...stop ."

 Chewbacca came to a halt. Mentally crossing her fingers, Leia ignited her lightsaber beneath the Wookiee's back, locked it on, and let it drop.

 And like a blazing chunk of wayward lightning, it fell away, swinging down and back on the end of the rope in a long pendulum arc. It reached bottom and swung back up the other direction

 And into the underside of the airspeeder.

 There was a spectacular flash as the lightsaber blade sliced through the repulsorlift generator. An instant later the airspeeder was dropping like a stone, two separate blazes flaring from either side. The craft fell into the mists below, and for a long moment the fires were visible as first two, and then as a single diffuse spot of light. Then even that faded, leaving only the lightsaber swinging gently in the darkness.

 Leia took a shuddering breath. "Let's go retrieve the lightsaber," she told Chewbacca. "After that, I think we can probably just cut our way back up. I doubt there are any of them left now."

 [And then directly to yourr ship?] Ralrra asked as they headed back to the branch where she'd tied the rope.

 Leia hesitated, the image of that second alien in her room coming back to mind. Standing there facing her, an unreadable emotion in face and body language, so stunned or enraptured or frightened that he didn't even notice Chewbacca's entry... "Back to the ship," she answered Ralrra. "But not directly."

 

 The alien was sitting motionless in a low seat in the tiny police interrogation room, a small bandage on the side of his head the only external evidence of Chewbacca's blow. His hands were resting in his lap, the fingers laced intricately together. Stripped of all clothing and equipment, he'd been given a loose Wookiee robe to wear. On someone else the effect of the outsized garment might have been comical. But not on him. Neither the robe nor his inactivity did anything to hide the aura of deadly competence that he wore like a second skin. He wasprobably always would bea member of a dangerous and persistent group of trained killing machines.

 And he'd asked specifically to see Leia. In person.

 Towering beside her, Chewbacca growled one final objection. "I don't much like it either," Leia conceded, gazing at the monitor display and trying to screw up her courage. "But he let me go back at the house, before you came in. I want to knowIneed to knowwhat that was all about."

 Briefly, her conversation with Luke on the eve of the Battle of Endor flashed to mind. His quiet firmness, in the face of all her fears, that confronting Darth Vader was something he had to do. That decision had nearly killed him... and had ultimately brought them victory.

 But Luke had felt some faint wisps of good still buried deep inside Vader. Did she feel something similar in this alien killer? Or was she driven merely by morbid curiosity?

 Or perhaps by mercy?

 "You can watch and listen from here," she told Chewbacca, handing him her blaster and stepping to the door. The lightsaber she left hooked onto her belt, though what use it would be in such close quarters she didn't know. "Don't come in unless I'm in trouble." Taking a deep breath, she unlocked the door and pressed the release.

 The alien looked up as the door slid open, and it seemed to Leia that he sat up straighter as she stepped inside. The door slid shut behind her, and for a long moment they just eyed each other. "I'm Leia Organa Solo," she said at last. "You wanted to talk to me?"

 He gazed at her for another moment. Then, slowly, he stood up and reached out a hand. "Your hand," he said, his voice gravelly and strangely accented. "May I have it?"

 Leia took a step forward and offered him her hand, acutely aware that she had just committed an irrevocable act of trust. From here, if he so chose, he could pull her to him and snap her neck before anyone outside could possibly intervene.

 He didn't pull her toward him. Leaning forward, holding her hand in an oddly gentle grip, he raised it to his snout and pressed it against two large nostrils half hidden beneath strands of hair.

 And smelled it.

 He smelled it again, and again, taking long, deep breaths. Leia found herself staring at his nostrils, noticing for the first time their size and the soft flexibility of the skin folds around them. Like those of a tracking animal, she realized. A memory flashed to mind: how, as he'd held her helpless back at the house, those same nostrils had been pressed into her neck.

 And right after that was when he'd let her go...

 Slowly, almost tenderly, the alien straightened up. "It is then true," he grated, releasing her hand and letting his own fall to his side. Those huge eyes stared at her, brimming with an emotion whose nature her Jedi skills could vaguely sense but couldn't begin to identify. "I was not mistaken before."

 Abruptly, he dropped to both knees. "I seek forgiveness, Leia Organa Solo, for my actions," he said, ducking his head to the floor, his hands splayed out to the sides as they had been in that encounter back at the house. "Our orders did not identify you, but gave only your name."

 "I understand," she nodded, wishing she did. "But now you know who I am?"

 The alien's face dropped a couple of centimeters closer to the floor. "You are theMal'ary'ush ," he said. "The daughter and heir of the Lord Darth Vader."

 "He who was our master."

 Leia stared down at him, feeling her mouth fall open as she struggled to regain her mental balance. The right-angle turns were all coming too quickly. "Your master?" she repeated carefully.

 "He who came to us in our desperate need," the alien said, his voice almost reverent. "Who lifted us from our despair, and gave us hope."

 "I see," she managed. This whole thing was rapidly becoming unreal... but one fact already stood out. The alien prostrating himself before her was prepared to treat her as royalty.

 And she knew how to behave like royalty.

 "You may rise," she told him, feeling her voice and posture and manner settling into the almost-forgotten patterns of the Alderaanian court. "What is your name?"

 "I am called Khabarakh by our lord," the alien said, getting to his feet. "In the language of the Noghri" He made a long, convoluted roiling noise that Leia's vocal cords didn't have a hope of imitating.

 "I'll call you Khabarakh," she said. "Your people are called the Noghri?"

 "Yes." The first hint of uncertainty seemed to cross the dark eyes. "But you are theMal'ary'ush ," he added, with obvious question.

 "My father had many secrets," she told him grimly. "You, obviously, were one of them. You said he brought you hope. Tell me how."

 "He came to us," the Noghri said. "After the mighty battle. After the destruction."

 "What battle?"

 Khabarakh's eyes seemed to drift into memory. "Two great starships met in the space over our world," he said, his gravelly voice low. "Perhaps more than two; we never knew for certain. They fought all the day and much of the night... and when the battle was over, our land was devastated."

 Leia winced, a pang of sympathetic ache running through her. Of ache, and of guilt. "We never hurt non-Imperial forces or worlds on purpose," she said softly. "Whatever happened, it was an accident."

 The dark eyes fixed again on her. "The Lord Vader did not think so. He believed it was done on purpose, to drive fear and terror into the souls of the Emperor's enemies."

 "Then the Lord Vader was mistaken," Leia said, meeting that gaze firmly. "Our battle was with the Emperor, not his subjugated servants."

 Khabarakh drew himself up stiffly. "We were not the Emperor's servants," he grated. "We were a simple people, content to live our lives without concern for the dealings of others."

 "You serve the Empire now," Leia pointed out.

 "In return for the Emperor's help," Khabarakh said, a hint of pride showing through his deference. "Only he came to our aid when we so desperately needed it. In his memory, we serve his designated heirthe man to whom the Lord Vader long ago entrusted us."

 "I find it difficult to believe the Emperor ever really cared about you," Leia told him bluntly. "That's not the sort of man he was. All he cared about was obtaining your service against us."

 "Only he came to our aid," Khabarakh repeated.

 "Because we were unaware of your plight," Leia told him.

 "So you say."

 Leia raised her eyebrows. "Then give me a chance to prove it. Tell me where your world is."

 Khabarakh jerked back. "That is impossible. You would seek us out and complete the destruction"

 "Khabarakh," Leia cut him off. "Who am I?"

 The folds around the Noghri's nostrils seemed to flatten. "You are the Lady Vader. TheMal'ary'ush ."

 "Did the Lord Vader ever lie to you?"

 "You said he did."

 "I said he was mistaken," Leia reminded him, perspiration starting to collect beneath her collar as she recognized the knife edge she was now walking along here. Her newfound status with Khabarakh rested solely on the Noghri's reverence for Darth Vader. Somehow, she had to attack Vader's words without simultaneously damaging that respect. "Even the Lord Vader could be deceived... and the Emperor was a master of deception."

 "The Lord Vader served the Emperor," Khabarakh insisted. "The Emperor would not have lied to him."

 Leia gritted her teeth. Stalemate. "Is your new lord equally honest with you?"

 Khabarakh hesitated. "I don't know."

 "Yes, you doyou said yourself he didn't tell you who it was you'd been sent to capture."

 A strange sort of low moan rumbled in Khabarakh's throat. "I am only a soldier, my lady. These matters are far beyond my authority and ability. My duty is to obey my orders.All of my orders."

 Leia frowned. Something about the way he'd said that... and abruptly, she knew what it was. For a captured commando facing interrogation, there could be only one order left to follow. "Yet you now know something none of your people are aware of," she said quickly. "You must live, to bring this information to them."

 Khabarakh had brought his palms to face each other, as if preparing to clap them together. Now he froze, staring at her. "The Lord Vader could read the souls of the Noghri," he said softly. "You are indeed hisMal'ary'ush ."

 "Your people need you, Khabarakh," she told him. "As do I. Your death now would only hurt those you seek to help."

 Slowly, he lowered his hands. "How is it you need me?"

 "Because I need your help if I'm to do anything for your people," she said. "You must tell me the location of your world."

 "I cannot," he said firmly. "To do so could bring ultimate destruction upon my world. And upon me, if it were learned I had given you such information."

 Leia pursed her lips. "Then take me there."

 "I cannot!"

 "Why not?"

 "I... cannot."

 She fixed him with her best regal stare. "I am the daughtertheMal'ary'ush of the Lord Darth Vader," she said firmly. "By your own admission, he was the hope of your world. Have matters improved since he delivered you to your new leader?"

 He hesitated. "No. He has told us there is little more that he or anyone else can do."

 "I would prefer to judge that for myself," she told him loftily. "Or would your people consider a single human to be such a threat?"

 Khabarakh twitched. "You would come alone? To a people seeking your capture?"

 Leia swallowed hard, a shiver running down her back. No, she hadn't meant to imply that. But then, she hadn't been sure of why she'd wanted to talk to Khabarakh in the first place. She could only hope that the Force was guiding her intuition in all this. "I trust your people to be honorable," she said quietly. "I trust them to grant me a hearing."

 She turned and stepped to the door. "Consider my offer," she told him. "Discuss it with those whose counsel you value. Then, if you choose, meet me in orbit above the world of Endor in one month's time."

 "You will come alone?" Khabarakh asked, apparently still not believing it.

 She turned and looked him straight in that nightmare face. "I will come alone. Will you?"

 He faced her stare without flinching. "If I come," he said, "I will come alone."

 She held his gaze a moment longer, then nodded. "I hope to see you there. Farewell."

 "Farewell... Lady Vader."

 He was still staring at her as the door opened and she left.

 

 The tiny ship shot upward through the clouds, vanishing quickly from the Rwookrrorro air-control visual monitor. Beside Leia, Chewbacca growled angrily. "I can't say I'm really happy with it, either," she confessed. "But we can't dodge them forever. If we have even a chance of getting them out from under Imperial control..." She shook her head.

 Chewbacca growled again. "I know," she said softly, some of his pain finding its way into her own heart. "I wasn't as close to Salporin as you were, but he was still my friend."

 The Wookiee turned away from the monitors and stomped across the room. Leia watched him, wishing there was something she could do to help. But there wasn't. Caught between conflicting demands of honor, he would have to work this out in the privacy of his own mind.

 Behind her, someone stirred. [It is time,] Ralrra said. [The memorial period has begun. We must join the otherrs.]

 Chewbacca growled an acknowledgment and went over to join him. Leia looked at Ralrra [This period is forr Wookiees only,] he rumbled. [Laterr, you will be permitted to join us.]

 "I understand," Leia said. "If you need me, I'll be on the landing platform, getting theLady Luck ready to fly."

 [If you truly feel it is safe to leave,] Ralrra said, still sounding doubtful.

 "It is," Leia told him. And even if it wasn't, she added silently to herself, she would still have no choice. She had a species name nowNoghriand it was vital that she return to Coruscant and get another records search underway.

 [Very well. The mourning period will begin in two hourrs.]

 Leia nodded, blinking back tears. "I'll be there," she promised.

 And wondered if this war would ever truly be over.

 

 Chapter 26

 The mass of vines hung twisted around and between half a dozen trees, looking like the web of a giant spider gone berserk. Fingering Skywalker's lightsaber, Mara studied the tangle, trying to figure out the fastest way to clear the path.

 Out of the corner of her eye, she saw Skywalker fidgeting. "Just keep your shirt on," she told him. "This'll only take a minute."

 "You really don't have to go for finesse, you know," he offered. "It's not like the lightsaber's running low on power."

 "Yes, butwe're running low on forest," she retorted. "You have any idea how far the hum of a lightsaber can carry in woods like this?"

 "Not really."

 "Me, neither. I'd like to keep it that way." She shifted her blaster to her left hand, ignited the lightsaber with her right, and made three quick cuts. The tangle of vines dropped to the ground as she closed the weapon down. "That wasn't so hard, now, was it?" she said, turning to face Skywalker and hooking the lightsaber back onto her belt. She started to turn away

 The droid's warning squeal came a fraction of a second before the sudden rustle of leaves. She whirled back, flipping her blaster into her right hand as the vornskr leaped toward Skywalker from a branch three trees away.

 Even after two long days of travel, Skywalker's reflexes were still adequate to the task. He let go the handles of the travois and dropped to the ground just ahead of the vornskr's trajectory. Four sets of claws and a whip tail took a concerted swipe at him as the predator shot by overhead. Mara waited until it had landed, and as it spun back around toward its intended prey, she shot it.

 Cautiously, Skywalker got back to his feet and looked warily around. "I wish you'd change your mind about giving me back my lightsaber," he commented as he bent down to pick up the travois handles again. "You must be getting tired of shooting vornskrs off me."

 "What, you afraid I'm going to miss?" she retorted, stepping over to prod the vornskr with her foot. It was dead, all right.

 "You're an excellent shot," he conceded, dragging the travois toward the tangle of vines she'd just cleared out. "But you've also gone two nights without any sleep. That's going to catch up with you eventually."

 "You just worry about yourself," she snapped. "Come on, get movingwe need to find someplace clear enough to send up the sonde balloon."

 Skywalker headed off, the droid strapped to the travois behind him beeping softly to itself. Mara brought up the rear, watching to make sure the travois wasn't leaving too clear a trail and scowling hard at the back of Skywalker's head.

 The really irritating part was that he was right. That pass from left to right hand a minute agoa technique she'd done a thousand times beforeshe'd come within a hair of missing the catch completely. Her heart thudded constantly now, not quieting down even during rest. And there were long periods during their march where her mind simply drifted, instead of focusing on the task at hand.

 Once, long ago, she'd gone six days without sleep. Now, after only two, she was already starting to fall apart.

 She clenched her teeth and scowled a little harder. If he was hoping to see the collapse, he was going to be sorely disappointed. If for no other reason than professional pride, she was going to see this through.

 Ahead, Skywalker stumbled slightly as he crossed a patch of rough ground. The right travois handle slipped out of his grip, nearly dumping the droid off the travois and eliciting a squeal of protest from the machine. "So who's getting tired now?" Mara growled as he stooped to pick up the stick again. "That's the third time in the past hour."

 "It's just my hand," he replied calmly. "It seems to be permanently numb this afternoon."

 "Sure," she said. Ahead, a small patch of blue sky winked down through the tree branches. "There's our hole," she said, nodding to it. "Put the droid in the middle."

 Skywalker did as he was instructed, then went and sat down against one of the trees edging the tiny clearing. Mara got the small sonde balloon filled and sent it aloft on its antenna wire, running a line from the receiver into the socket where the droid's retrieval jack had once been. "All set," she said, glancing over at Skywalker.

 Leaning back against his tree, he was sound asleep.

 Mara snorted with contempt.Jedi! she threw the epithet at him as she turned back to the droid. "Come on, let's get going," she told it, sitting down carefully on the ground. Her twisted ankle seemed to be largely healed, but she knew better than to push it.

 The droid beeped questioningly, its dome swiveling around to look briefly at Skywalker. "I said let's get going," she repeated harshly.

 The droid beeped again, a resigned sort of sound. The communicator's pulse indicator flashed once as the droid requested a message dump from the distant X-wing's computer; flashed again as the dump came back.

 Abruptly the droid squealed in obvious excitement. "What?" Mara demanded, snatching out her blaster and giving the area a quick scan. Nothing seemed out of place. "What, there's finally a message?"

 The droid beeped affirmatively, its dome again turning toward Skywalker. "Well, let's have it," Mara growled. "Come onif there's anything in it he needs to hear, you can play it for him later."

 Assumingshe didn't addthere wasn't anything in the message that suggested she needed to come out of the forest alone. If there was...

 The droid bent forward slightly, and a holographic image appeared on the matted leaves.

 But not an image of Karrde, as she'd expected. It was, instead, an image of a golden-skinned protocol droid. "Good day, Master Luke," the protocol droid said in a remarkably prissy voice. "I bring greetings to you from Captain Karrdeand, of course, to you as well, Mistress Mara," it added, almost as an afterthought. "He and Captain Solo are most pleased to hear you are both alive and well after your accident."

 Captain Solo?Mara stared at the holograph, feeling totally stunned. What in the Empire did Karrde think he was doing? he'd actuallytold Solo and Calrissian about Skywalker?

 "I trust you'll be able to decrypt this message, Artoo," the protocol prissy continued. "Captain Karrde suggested that I be used to add a bit more confusion to the counterpart encrypt. According to him, there are Imperial stormtroopers waiting in Hyllyard City for you to make your appearance."

 Mara clenched her teeth, throwing a look at her sleeping prisoner. So Thrawn hadn't been fooled. He knew Skywalker was here, and was waiting to take them both.

 With a vicious effort, she stifled the fatigue-fed panic rising in her throat. No. Thrawn didn'tknow at least, not for sure. He only suspected. If he'd known for sure, there wouldn't have been anyone left back at the camp to send her this message.

 "The story Captain Karrde told the Imperials was that a former employee stole valuable merchandise and tried to escape, with a current employee named Jade in pursuit. He suggests that, since he never specified Jade as being a woman, that perhaps you and Mistress Mara could switch roles when you leave the forest."

 "Right," Mara muttered under her breath. If Karrde thought she was going to cheerfully hand her blaster over for Skywalker to stick in her back, he'd better try thinking again.

 "At any rate," the protocol droid continued, "he says he and Captain Solo are working out a plan to try to intercept you before the stormtroopers do. If not, they will do their best to rescue you from them. I'm afraid there's nothing more I can say at the momentCaptain Karrde has put a one-minute real-time limit on this message, to prevent anyone from locating the transmission point. He wishes you good luck. Take good care of Master Luke, Artoo... and yourself, too."

 The image vanished and the droid's projector winked out. Mara shut down the communicator, setting the antenna spool to begin winding the balloon back down.

 "It's a good idea," Skywalker murmured.

 She looked sharply at him. His eyes were still closed. "Ithought you were faking," she spat, not really truthfully.

 "Not faking," he corrected her sleepily. "Drifting in and out. It's still a good idea."

 She snorted. "Forget it. We'll try going a couple of kilometers north instead, circling out and back to Hyllyard from the plains." She glanced at her chrono, then up through the trees. Dark clouds had moved in over the past few minutes, covering the blue sky that had been there. Not rain clouds, she decided, but they would still cut rather strongly into what was left of the available daylight. "We might as well save that for tomorrow," she said, favoring her ankle again as she got back to her feet. "You want to getoh, never mind," she interrupted herself. If his breathing was anything to go by, he'd drifted off again.

 Which left the task of putting camp together up to her. Terrific. "Stay put," she growled to the droid. She turned back to where she'd dropped the survival kit

 The droid's electronic shriek brought her spinning back around again, hand clawing for her blaster, eyes flicking around for the danger

 And then a heavy weight slammed full onto her shoulders and back, sending hot needles of pain into her skin and throwing her face-first to the ground.

 Her last thought, before the darkness took her, was to wish desperately that she'd killed Skywalker when she'd had the chance.

 

 Artoo's warbling alert jerked Luke out of his doze. His eyes snapped open, just as a blur of muscle and claw launched itself through space onto Mara's back.

 He bounded to his feet, sleepiness abruptly gone. The vornskr was standing over Mara, its front claws planted on her shoulders, its head turned to the side as it prepared to sink its teeth into her neck. Mara herself lay unmoving, the back of her head toward Lukedead or merely stunned, it was impossible to tell. Artoo, clearly too far away to reach her in time, was nevertheless moving in that direction as fast as his wheels could manage, his small electric arc welder extended as if for battle.

 Taking a deep breath, Luke screamed.

 Not an ordinary scream; but a shivering, booming, inhuman howl that seemed to fill the entire clearing and reverberate back from the distant hills. It was the blood-freezing call of a krayt dragon, the same call Ben Kenobi had used to scare the sand people away from him all those years ago on Tatooine.

 The vornskr wasn't scared away. But it was clearly startled, its prey temporarily forgotten. Shifting its weight partially off Mara's back, it turned, crouching, to stare toward the sound.

 For a long moment Luke locked gazes with the creature, afraid to move lest he break the spell. If he could distract it long enough for Artoo to get there with his welder...

 And then, still pinned to the ground, Mara twitched. Luke cupped his hands around his mouth and howled again. Again, the vornskr shifted its weight in response.

 And with a sound that was half grunt and half combat yell, Mara twisted around onto her back beneath the predator, her hands snaking past the front claws to grip its throat.

 It was the only opening Luke was going to get; and with a vornskr against an injured human, it wasn't going to last for long. Pushing off from the tree trunk behind him, Luke charged, aiming for the vornskr's flank.

 He never got there. Even as he braced himself for the impact, the vornskr's whip tail whistled out of nowhere to catch him solidly along shoulder and face and send him sprawling sideways to the ground.

 He was on his feet again in an instant, dimly aware of the line of fire burning across cheek and forehead. The vornskr hissed as he came toward it again, slashing razor-sharp claws at him to ward him back. Artoo reached the struggle and sent a spark into the predator's left front paw; almost casually, the vornskr swung at the welder, snapping it off and sending the pieces flying. Simultaneously, the tail whipped around, the impact lifting Artoo up on one set of wheels. It swung again and again, each time coming closer to knocking the droid over.

 Luke gritted his teeth, mind searching furiously for a plan. Shadowboxing at the creature's head like this wasn't anything more than a delaying tactic; but the minute the distraction ceased, Mara was as good as dead. The vornskr would either slash her arms with its claws or else simply overwhelm her grip by brute force. With the loss of his welder, Artoo had no fighting capability left; and if the vornskr kept at him with that whip tail...

 The tail. "Artoo!" Luke snapped. "Next time that tail hits you, try to grab it."

 Artoo beeped a shaky acknowledgment and extended his heavy grasping arm. Luke watched out of the corner of his eye, still trying to keep the vornskr's head and front paws busy. The tail whipped around again, and with a warble of triumph, Artoo caught it.

 A warble that turned quickly into a screech. Again with almost casual strength, the vornskr ripped its tail free, taking most of the grasping arm with it.

 But it had been pinned out of action for a pair of heartbeats, and that was all the time Luke needed. Diving around Artoo's bulk and under the trapped whip tail, he darted his hand to Mara's side and snatched back his lightsaber.

 The whip tail slashed toward him as he rolled back to his feet, but by the time it got there Luke was out of range around Artoo's side again. Igniting the lightsaber, he reached the blazing blade past the flailing claws and brushed the vornskr's nose.

 The predator screamed, in anger or pain, shying back from this bizarre creature that had bit it. Luke tapped it again and again, trying to drive it away from Mara where he could safely deliver a killing blow.

 Abruptly, in a single smooth motion, the vornskr leaped backwards onto solid ground, then sprang straight at Luke. Also in a single smooth motion, Luke cut it in half.

 "About time," a hoarse voice croaked from beneath his feet. He looked down to see Mara push half the dead vornskr off her chest and raise herself up on one elbow. "What in blazes was that stupid game you were playing?"

 "I didn't think you'd like your hands cut off if I missed," Luke told her, breathing hard. He took a step back as she sat up and offered her a helping hand.

 She waved the hand away. Rolling slowly onto hands and knees, she pushed herself tiredly to her feet and turned back to face him.

 With her blaster back in her hand.

 "Just drop the lightsaber and move back," she panted, gesturing with the weapon for emphasis.

 Luke sighed, shaking his head. "I don't believe you," he said, shutting down the lightsaber and dropping it onto the ground. The adrenaline was receding from his system now, leaving both face and shoulder aching like fury. "Or didn't you notice that Artoo and I just saved your life?"

 "I noticed. Thanks." Keeping her blaster trained on him, Mara stooped to retrieve the lightsaber. "I figure that's my reward for not shooting you two days ago. Get over there and sit down."

 Luke looked over at Artoo, who was moaning softly to himself. "Do you mind if I look at Artoo first?"

 Mara looked down at the droid, her lips compressed into a thin line. "Sure, go ahead." Moving clear of both of them, she picked up the survival pack and trudged off to one of the trees at the edge of the clearing.

 Artoo wasn't in as bad a shape as Luke had feared. Both the welder and the grasping arm had broken off cleanly, leaving no trailing wires or partial components that might get caught on something else. Speaking quiet encouragement to the droid, Luke got the two compartments sealed.

 "Well?" Mara asked, sitting with her back to a tree and gingerly applying salve to the oozing claw marks on her arms.

 "He's okay for now," Luke told her as he went back over to his own tree and sat down. "He's been damaged worse than this before."

 "I'm so glad to hear it," she said sourly. She glanced at Luke, took a longer look. "He got you good, didn't he?"

 Carefully, Luke touched the welt running across his cheek and forehead. "I'll be all right."

 She snorted. "Sure you will," she said, her voice laced with sarcasm as she went back to treating her gashes. "I forgotyou're a hero, too."

 For a long minute Luke watched her, trying once more to understand the complexities and contradictions of this strange woman. Even from three meters away he could see that her hand was shaking as she applied the salve: with reaction, perhaps, or muscle fatigue. Almost certainly with fearshe'd escaped a bloody death by a bare handful of centimeters, and she would have to be a fool not to recognize that.

 And yet, whatever she was feeling inside, she was clearly determined not to let any of it out past that rock-hard surface she'd so carefully built up around herself. As if she was afraid to let weakness of any sort show through...

 Abruptly, as if feeling his eyes on her, Mara looked up. "I said thanks already," she growled. "What do you want, a medal?"

 Luke shook his head. "I just want to know what happened to you."

 For a moment those green eyes flashed again with the old hatred. But only for a moment. The vornskr attack, coming on top of two days of laborious travel and no sleep, had taken a severe toll on her emotional strength. The anger faded from her eyes, leaving only a tired coldness behind. "Youhappened to me," she told him, her voice more fatigued than embittered. "You came out of a grubby sixth-rate farm on a tenth-rate planet, and destroyed my life."

 "How?"

 Contempt briefly filled her face. "You don't have the faintest idea who I am, do you?"

 Luke shook his head. "I'm sure I'd remember you if we'd met."

 "Oh, right," she said sardonically. "The great, omniscient Jedi. See all, hear all, know all, understand all. No, we didn't actually meet; but I was there, if you'd bothered to notice me. I was a dancer at Jabba the Hutt's palace the day you came for Solo."

 So that was it. She'd worked for Jabba; and when he'd killed Jabba, he'd ruined her life...

 Luke frowned at her. No. Her slim figure, her agility and gracethose certainly could belong to a professional dancer. But her piloting skills, her expert marksmanship, her inexplicable working knowledge of lightsabersthose most certainly did not.

 Mara was still waiting, daring him with her expression to figure it out. "You weren't just a dancer, though," he told her. "That was only a cover."

 Her lip twisted. "Very good. That vaunted Jedi insight, no doubt. Keep going; you're doing so well. What was I really doing there?"

 Luke hesitated. There were all sorts of possibilities for this one: bounty hunter, smuggler, quiet bodyguard for Jabba, spy from some rival criminal organization...

 No. Her knowledge of lightsabers... and suddenly, all the pieces fell together with a rush. "You were waiting for me," he said. "Vader knew I'd go there to try and rescue Han, and he sent you to capture me."

 "Vader?" She all but spat the name. "Don't make me laugh. Vader was a fool, and skating on the edge of treason along with it. My master sent me to Jabba's to kill you, not recruit you."

 Luke stared at her, an icy shiver running up his back. It couldn't be... but even as he gazed into that tortured face, he knew with sudden certainty that it was. "And your master," he said quietly, "was the Emperor."

 "Yes," she said, her voice a snake's hiss. "And you destroyed him."

 Luke swallowed hard, the pounding of his own heart the only sound. He hadn't killed the EmperorDarth Vader had done thatbut Mara didn't seem inclined to worry over such subtleties. "You're wrong, though," he said. "Hedid try to recruit me."

 "Only because I failed," she ground out, her throat muscles tight. "And only when Vader had you standing right there in front of him. What, you don't think he knew Vader had offered to help you overthrow him?"

 Unconsciously, Luke flexed the fingers of his numbed artificial hand. Yes, Vader had indeed suggested such an alliance during their Cloud City duel. "I don't think it was a serious offer," he murmured.

 "The Emperor did," Mara said flatly. "He knew. And what he knew, I knew."

 Her eyes filled with distant pain. "I was his hand, Skywalker," she said, her voice remembering. "That's how I was known to his inner court: as the Emperor's Hand. I served him all over the galaxy, doing jobs the Imperial Fleet and stormtroopers couldn't handle. That was my one great talent, you seeI could hear his call from anywhere in the Empire, and report back to him the same way. I exposed traitors for him, brought down his enemies, helped him keep the kind of control over the mindless bureaucracies that he needed. I had prestige, and power, and respect."

 Slowly, her eyes came back from the past. "And you took it all away from me. If only for that, you deserve to die."

 "What went wrong?" Luke forced himself to ask.

 Her lip twisted. "Jabba wouldn't let me go with the execution party. That was itpure and simple. I tried begging, cajoling, bargainingI couldn't change his mind."

 "No," Luke said soberly. "Jabba was highly resistant to the mind-controlling aspects of the Force."

 But if shehad been on the Sail Barge...

 Luke shivered, seeing in his mind's eye that terrifying vision in the dark cave on Dagobah. The mysterious silhouetted woman standing there on the Sail Barge's upper deck, laughing at him as she held his captured lightsaber high.

 The first time, years ago, the cave had spun him an image of a possible future. This time, he knew now, it had shown him a possible past. "You would have succeeded," he said quietly.

 Mara looked sharply at him. "I'm not asking for understanding or sympathy," she bit out. "You wanted to know. Fine; now you know."

 He let her tend her wounds in silence for a moment. "So why are you here?" he asked. "Why not with the Empire?"

 "What Empire?" she countered. "It's dyingyou know that as well as I do."

 "But while it's still there"

 She cut him off with a withering glare. "Who would I go to?" she demanded. "They didn't know menone of them did. Not as the Emperor's Hand, anyway. I was a shadow, working outside the normal lines of command and protocol. There were no records kept of my activities. Those few I was formally introduced to thought of me as court-hanging froth, a minor bit of mobile decoration kept around the palace to amuse the Emperor."

 Her eyes went distant again with memory. "There was nowhere for me to go after Endor," she said bitterly. "No contacts, no resourcesI didn't even have a real identity anymore. I was on my own."

 "And so you linked up with Karrde."

 "Eventually. First I spent four and a half years sloshing around the rotten underfringes of the galaxy, doing whatever I could." Her eyes were steady on him, with a trace of hatred fire back in them. "I worked hard to get where I am, Skywalker. You're not going to ruin it for me. Not this time."

 "I don't want to ruin anything for you," Luke told her evenly. "All I want is to get back to the New Republic."

 "And I want the old Empire back," she retorted. "We don't always get what we want, do we?"

 Luke shook his head. "No. We don't."

 For a moment she glared at him. Then, abruptly, she scooped up a tube of salve and tossed it at him. "Hereget that welt fixed up. And get some sleep. Tomorrow's going to be a busy day."

 

 Chapter 27

 The battered A-Class bulk freighter drifted off theChimera 's starboard side: a giant space-going box with a hyperdrive attached, its faded plating glistening dully in the glare of the Star Destroyer's floodlights. Sitting at his command station, Thrawn studied the sensor data and nodded. "It looks good, Captain," he said to Pellaeon. "Exactly the way it should. You may proceed with the test when ready."

 "It'll be a few more minutes yet, sir," Pellaeon told him, studying the readouts on his console. "The technicians are still having some problems getting the cloaking shield tuned."

 He held his breath, half afraid of a verbal explosion. The untested cloaking shield and the specially modified freighter it was mounted to had cost hideous amounts of moneymoney the Empire really didn't have to spare. For the technology to now suddenly come up finicky, particularly with the whole of the Sluis Van operation hanging squarely in the balance...

 But the Grand Admiral merely nodded. "There's time," he said calmly. "What word from Myrkr?"

 "The last regular report came in two hours ago," Pellaeon told him. "Still negative."

 Thrawn nodded again. "And the latest count from Sluis Van?"

 "Uh..." Pellaeon checked the appropriate file. "A hundred twelve transient warships in all. Sixty-five being used as cargo carriers, the others on escort duty."

 "Sixty-five," Thrawn repeated with obvious satisfaction. "Excellent. It means we get to pick and choose."

 Pellaeon stirred uncomfortably. "Yes, sir."

 Thrawn turned away from his contemplation of the freighter to look at Pellaeon. "You have a concern, Captain?"

 Pellaeon nodded at the ship. "I don't like sending them into enemy territory without any communications."

 "We don't have much choice in the matter," Thrawn reminded him dryly. "That's how a cloaking shield worksnothing gets out, nothing gets in." He cocked an eyebrow. "Assuming, of course, that it works at all," he added pointedly.

 "Yes, sir. But..."

 "But what, Captain?"

 Pellaeon braced himself and took the plunge. "It seems to me, Admiral, that this is the sort of operation we ought to use C'baoth on."

 Thrawn's gaze hardened, just a bit. "C'baoth?"

 "Yes, sir. He could give us communications with"

 "We don't need communications, Captain," Thrawn cut him off. "Careful timing will be adequate for our purposes."

 "I disagree, Admiral. Under normal circumstances, yes, careful timing would get them into position. But there's no way to anticipate how long it'll take to get clearance from Sluis Control."

 "On the contrary," Thrawn countered coolly. "I've studied the Sluissi very carefully. I can anticipate exactly how long it will take them to clear the freighter."

 Pellaeon gritted his teeth. "If the controllers were all Sluissi, perhaps. But with the Rebellion funneling so much of their own material through the Sluis Van system, they're bound to have some of their own people in Control, as well."

 "It's of no consequence," Thrawn told him. "The Sluissi will be in charge.Their timing will determine events."

 Pellaeon exhaled and conceded defeat. "Yes, sir," he muttered.

 Thrawn eyed him. "It's not a question of bravado, Captain. Or of proving that the Imperial Fleet can function without him. The simple fact of the matter is that we can't afford to use C'baoth too much or too often."

 "Because we'll start depending on him," Pellaeon growled. "As if we were all borg-implanted into a combat computer."

 Thrawn smiled. "That still bothers you, doesn't it? No matter. That's part of it, but only a very small part. What concerns me more is that we don't give Master C'baoth too much of a taste for this kind of power."

 Pellaeon frowned at him. "He said he doesn't want power."

 "Then he lies," Thrawn returned coldly. "All men want power. And the more they have, the more they want."

 Pellaeon thought about that. "But if he's a threat to us..." He broke off, suddenly aware of the other officers and men working all around them.

 The Grand Admiral had no such reticence. "Why not dispose of him?" he finished the question. "It's very simple. Because we'll soon have the ability to fill his taste for power to the fullest... and once we've done so, he'll be no more of a threat than any other tool."

 "Leia Organa Solo and her twins?"

 "Exactly," Thrawn nodded, his eyes glittering. "Once C'baoth has them in his hand, these little excursions with the Fleet will be no more to him than distracting interludes that take him away from hisreal work."

 Pellaeon found himself looking away from the intensity of that gaze. The theory seemed good enough; but in actual practice... "That assumes, of course, that the Noghri are ever able to connect with her."

 "They will." Thrawn was quietly confident. "She and her guardians will eventually run out of tricks. Certainly long before we run out of Noghri."

 In front of Pellaeon, the display cleared. "They're ready, sir," he said.

 Thrawn turned back to the freighter. "At your convenience, Captain."

 Pellaeon took a deep breath and tapped the comm switch. "Cloaking shield:activate."

 And outside the view window, the battered freighter

 Stayed exactly as it was.

 Thrawn gazed hard at the freighter. Looked at his command displays, back at the freighter... and then turned to Pellaeon, a satisfied smile on his face. "Excellent, Captain. Precisely what I wanted. I congratulate you and your technicians."

 "Thank you, sir," Pellaeon said, relaxing muscles he hadn't realized were tense. "Then I take it the light is green?"

 The Grand Admiral's smile remained unchanged, his face hardening around it. "The light is green, Captain," he said grimly. "Alert the task force; prepare to move to the rendezvous point.

 "The Sluis Van shipyards are ours."

 

 Wedge Antilles looked up from the data pad with disbelief. "You've got to be kidding," he told the dispatcher. "Escortduty?"

 The other gave him an innocent look. "What's the big deal?" he asked. "You guys are X-wingsyou do escort all the time."

 "We escortpeople ," Wedge retorted. "We don't watchdog cargo ships."

 The dispatcher's innocent look collapsed into thinly veiled disgust, and Wedge got the sudden impression that he'd gone through this same argument a lot lately. "Look, Commander, don't dump it on me," he growled back. "It's a standard Frigate escortwhat's the difference whether the Frigate's got people or a break-down reactor aboard?"

 Wedge looked back at the data pad. It was a matter of professional pride, that's what the difference was. "Sluis Van's a pretty long haul for X-wings," he said instead.

 "Yeah, well, the spec line says you'll be staying aboard the Frigate until you actually hit the system," the dispatcher said, reaching over his desk to tap the paging key on Wedge's data pad. "You'll just ride him in from there."

 Wedge scanned the rest of the spec line. They'd then have to sit there in the shipyards and wait for the rest of the convoy to assemble before finally taking the cargo on to Bpfassh. "We're going to be a long time away from Coruscant with this," he said.

 "I'd look on that as a plus if I were you, Commander," the dispatcher said, lowering his voice. "Something here's coming to a head. I think Councilor Fey'lya and his people are about to make their move."

 Wedge felt a chill run through him. "You don't mean... acoup? "

 The dispatcher jumped as if scalded. "No, of course not. What do you think Fey'lya is?"

 He broke off, his eyes going wary. "Oh, I got it. You're one of Ackbar's diehards, huh? Face it, Commander; Ackbar's lost whatever touch he ever had with the common fighting man of the Alliance. Fey'lya's the only one on the Council who really cares about our welfare." He gestured at the data pad. "Case in point. All this garbage came down from Ackbar's office."

 "Yeah, well, there's still an Empire out there," Wedge muttered, uncomfortably aware that the dispatcher's verbal attack on Ackbar had neatly shifted him to the other side of his own argument. He wondered if the other had done that on purpose... or whether he really was one of the growing number of Fey'lya supporters in the military.

 And come to think of it, a little vacation away from Coruscant might not be such a bad idea, after all. At least it would get him away from all this crazy political stuff. "When do we leave?"

 "Soon as you can get your people together and aboard," the dispatcher said. "They're already loading your fighters."

 "Right." Wedge turned away from the desk and headed down the corridor toward the ready rooms. Yes, a quiet little run back out to Sluis Van and Bpfassh would be just the thing right now. Give him some breathing space to try to sort out just what was happening to this New Republic he'd risked so much to help build.

 And if the Imperials took a poke at them along the way... well, at leastthat was a threat he could fight back against.

 

 Chapter 28

 It was just before noon when they began to notice the faint sounds wafting occasionally to them through the forest. It was another hour after that before they were close enough for Luke to finally identify them.

 Speeder bikes.

 "You're sure that's a military model?" Mara muttered as the whine/drone rose and fell twice more before fading again into the distance.

 "I'm sure," Luke told her grimly. "I nearly ran one of them into a tree on Endor."

 She didn't reply, and for a moment Luke wondered if the mention of Endor might not have been a good idea. But a glance at Mara's face relieved that fear. She was not brooding, but listening. "Sounds like they're off to the south, too," she said after a minute. "North... I don't hear anything from that direction."

 Luke listened. "Neither do I," he said. "I wonder... Artoo, can you make up an audio map for us?"

 There was an acknowledging beep. A moment later the droid's holo projector came on and a two-color map appeared, hovering a few centimeters over the matted leaves underfoot.

 "I was right," Mara said, pointing. "A few units directly ahead of us, the rest off to the south. Nothing at all north."

 "Which means we must have veered to the north," Luke said.

 Mara frowned at him. "How do you figure that?"

 "Well, they must know we'll make for Hyllyard City," he said. "They're bound to center their search on the direct approach."

 Mara smiled thinly. "Such wonderful Jedi naivete," she said. "I don't suppose you considered the fact that just because we can't hear them doesn't mean they aren't there."

 Luke frowned down at the holographic map. "Well, of course theycould have a force lying in wait there," he agreed. "But what would it gain them?"

 "Oh, come on, Skywalkerit's the oldest tactical trick in the book. If the perimeter looks impossible to crack, the quarry goes to ground and waits for a better opportunity. You don't want him to do that, so you give him what looks like a possible way through." She squatted down, ran a finger through the "quiet" section on the map. "In this case, they get a bonus: if we swing north to avoid the obvious speeder bikes, it's instant proof that we've got something to hide from them."

 Luke grimaced. "Not that they really need any proof."

 Mara shrugged and straightened up again. "Some officers are more legal-minded than others. The question is, what do we do now?"

 Luke looked back down at the map. By Mara's reckoning, they were no more than four or five kilometers from the edge of the foresttwo hours, more or less. If the Imperials had this much organization already set up in front of them... "They're probably going to try to ring us," he said slowly. "Move units around to the north and south, and eventually behind us."

 "If they haven't done so already," Mara said. "No reason we would have heard themthey don't know exactly how fast we're moving, so they'll have made it a big circle. Probably using a wide ring of Chariot assault vehicles or hoverscouts with a group of speeder bikes working around each focal point. It's the standard stormtrooper format for a web."

 Luke pursed his lips. But what the Imperialsdidn't know was that one of the quarry knew exactly what they were up to. "So how do we break out?" he asked.

 Mara hissed between her teeth. "We don't," she said flatly. "Not without a lot more equipment and resources than we've got."

 The faint whine/drone came again from somewhere ahead of them, rising and then fading as it passed by in the distance. "In that case," Luke said, "we might as well go straight up the middle. Call to them before they see us, maybe."

 Mara snorted. "Like we were casual tourists out here with nothing to hide?"

 "You have a better idea?"

 She glared at him. But it was a reflexive glare, without any real argument behind it. "Not really," she conceded at last. "I suppose you're also going to want to do that role-switch thing Karrde suggested."

 Luke shrugged. "We're not going to be able to blast our way through them," he reminded her. "And if you're right about that pincer movement, we're not going to sneak through them, either. All that's left is a bluff, and the better a bluff it is, the better chance we've got."

 Mara's lip twisted. "I suppose so." With only a slight hesitation, she dropped the power pack from her blaster and handed it and the forearm holster to him.

 Luke took them, hefted the blaster in his hand. "They may check to see if it's loaded," he pointed out mildly. "I would."

 "Look, Skywalker, if you think I'm going to give you a loaded weapon"

 "And if another vornskr finds us before the Imperials do," Luke cut her off quietly, "you'll never get it reloaded fast enough."

 "Maybe I don't care," she shot back.

 Luke nodded. "Maybe you don't."

 She glared at him again, but again, the glare lacked conviction. Teeth visibly grinding together, she slapped the power pack into his hand. "Thank you," Luke said, reloading the blaster and fastening it to his left forearm. "Now. Artoo?"

 The droid understood. One of the trapezoidal sections at the top of his upper dome, indistinguishable from all the other segments, slid open to reveal a long, deep storage compartment beneath it. Turning back to Mara, Luke held out his hand.

 She looked at the open hand, then at the storage compartment. "So that's how you did it," she commented sourly, unhooking his lightsaber and handing it over. "I always wondered how you smuggled that thing into Jabba's."

 Luke dropped the lightsaber in, and Artoo slid the door shut behind it. "I'll call for it if I need it," he told the droid.

 "Don't count on being very good with it," Mara warned. "The ysalamiri effect is supposed to extend several kilometers past the edge of the forestnone of those little attack-anticipation tricks will work anywhere near Hyllyard City."

 "I understand," Luke nodded. "I guess we're ready to go, then."

 "Not quite," Mara said, eyeing him. "There's still that face of yours."

 Luke cocked an eyebrow. "I don't think Artoo's got anywhere to hidethat ."

 "Funny. I had something else in mind." Mara glanced around, then headed off toward a stand of odd-looking bushes a few meters away. Reaching it, she pulled the end of her tunic sleeve down to cover her hand and carefully picked a few of the leaves. "Pull up your sleeve and hold out your arm," she ordered as she returned with them.

 He did so, and she brushed his forearm lightly with the tip of one of the leaves. "Now. Let's see if this works."

 "What exactly is it supposed toaah!" The last of Luke's air came out in an explosive burst as a searing pain lanced through his forearm.

 "Perfect," Mara said with grim satisfaction. "You're allergic as anything to them. Oh, relaxthe pain will be gone in a few seconds."

 "Oh, thanks," Luke gritted back. The pain was indeed receding. "Right. Now, what about thismmm!this blasteditch ?"

 "That'll hang on a little longer," she said, gesturing at his arm. "But never mind that. What do you think?"

 Luke gritted his teeth. The itching was not-so-subtle torture... but she was right. Where she'd brushed the leaf the skin had turned dark and puffy, sprinkled with tiny pustules. "Looks disgusting," he said.

 "Sure does," she agreed. "You want to do it yourself, or you want me to do it for you?"

 Luke gritted his teeth. This wasnot going to be pleasant. "I can do it."

 It was indeed unpleasant; but by the time he finished brushing his chin with the leaves the pain had already begun to recede from his forehead. "I hope I didn't get it too close to my eyes," he commented between clenched teeth, throwing the leaves away into the forest and fighting hard against the urge to dig into his face with both sets of fingernails. "It'd be handy to be able to see the rest of the afternoon."

 "I think you'll be all right," Mara assured him, studying the result. "The rest of your face is pretty horrendous, though. You won't look anything like whatever pictures they have, that's for sure."

 "Glad to hear it." Luke took a deep breath and ran through the Jedi pain suppression exercises. Without the Force they weren't all that effective, but they seemed to help a little. "How long will I look like this?"

 "The puffiness should start going down in a few hours. It won't be completely gone until tomorrow."

 "Good enough. We ready, then?"

 "As ready as we'll ever be." Turning her back to Artoo, she took the travois handles and started walking. "Come on."

 

 They made good time, despite the lingering tenderness of Mara's ankle and the distractions inherent in a faceful of itch. To Luke's relief, the itching began to fade after about half an hour, leaving only puffy numbness behind it.

 Mara's ankle was another story, however, and as he walked behind her and Artoo he could see clearly how she was having to favor it. The added burden of Artoo's travois wasn't helping, and twice he almost suggested that they give up on the role switching. But he resisted the urge. It was their best chance of getting out of this, and they both knew it.

 Besides which, she had far too much pride to agree.

 They'd gone perhaps another kilometer, with the whine/drone of the speeder bikes rising and falling in the distance, when suddenly they were there.

 There were two of them: biker scouts in glistening white armor, swooping up to them and braking to a halt almost before Luke's ears had registered the sound of their approach. Which meant a very short ride, with target position already known.

 Which meant that the entire search party must have had them located and vectored for at least the past few minutes. It was just as well, Luke reflected, that he hadn't tried switching roles with Mara.

 "Halt!" one of the scouts called unnecessarily as they hovered there, both swivel blaster cannons trained and ready. "Identify yourselves, in the name of the Empire."

 And it was performance time. "Boy, am I gladyou showed up," Luke called back, putting as much relief into his voice as the puffy cheeks allowed. "You don't happen to have some sort of transport handy, do you? I'm about walked off my feet."

 There was just the slightest flicker of hesitation. "Identify yourself," the scout repeated.

 "My name's Jade," Luke told him. He gestured at Mara. "Got a gift here for Talon Karrde. I don't supposehe sent some transport, did he?"

 There was a short pause. The scouts conferring privately between themselves, Luke decided, or else calling back to base for instructions. The fact that the prisoner was a woman did indeed seem to have thrown them. Whether it would be enough, of course, was another question entirely.

 "You'll come with us," the scout ordered. "Our officer wants to talk to you. Youwomanput the droid down and move away from it."

 "Fine with me," Luke said as the second scout maneuvered his speeder bike to a position in front of Artoo's travois. "But I want both of you to witness, for the record, that I had her fair and square before you showed up. Karrde weasels his way out of these capture fees too often; he's not going to weasel out of this one."

 "You're a bounty hunter?" the scout asked, a clear note of disdain in his voice.

 "That's right," Luke said, putting some professional dignity in his voice as a counter to the scout's contempt. Not that he minded their distaste. He was, in fact, counting on it. The more firmly the Imperials had the wrong image of him set in their minds, the longer it would take them to see through the deception.

 Somewhere in the back of his mind, though, he couldn't help but wonder if this was the sort of trick a Jedi should use.

 The second scout had dismounted and fastened the handles of Artoo's travois to the rear of his speeder bike. Remounting, he headed off at about the speed of a brisk walk. "You two follow him," the first scout ordered, swinging around to take up the rear. "Drop your blaster on the ground first, Jade."

 Luke complied, and they set off. The first scout put down just long enough to scoop up the abandoned blaster and then followed.

 It took another hour to reach the edge of the forest. The two speeder bikes stayed with them the whole time; but as they traveled, the party began to grow. More speeder bikes swept in from both sides, falling into close formation on either side of Luke and Mara or else joining up with the guards to both front and rear. As they neared the forest's edge, fully armored stormtroopers began to appear, too, moving in with blaster rifles held ready across their chests to take up positions around the two prisoners. As they did so, the scouts began drifting away, ranging farther out to form a kind of moving screen.

 By the time they finally stepped out from under the forest canopy, their escort numbered no fewer than ten biker scouts and twenty stormtroopers. It was an impressive display of military power... and more even than the fact of the search itself, it drove home to Luke the seriousness with which the mysterious man in charge of the Empire was treating this incident. Even at the height of their power, the Imperials hadn't spent stormtroopers lightly.

 Three more people were waiting for them in the fifty-meter strip of open land between the forest and the nearest structures of Hyllyard City: two more stormtroopers and a hard-faced man wearing a major's insignia on his dusty brown Imperial uniform. "About time," the latter muttered under his breath as Mara and Luke were nudged in his direction. "Who are they?"

 "The male says his name is Jade," one of the stormtroopers in front reported in that slightly filtered voice they all seemed to have. "Bounty hunter; works for Karrde. He claims the female is his prisoner."

 "Washis prisoner," the major corrected, looking at Mara. "What's your name, thief?"

 "Senni Kiffu," Mara said, her voice surly. "And I'm not a thief. Talon Karrde owes mehe owes me big. I didn't take any more than I had coming."

 The major looked at Luke, and Luke shrugged. "Karrde's other dealings aren't any of my business. He said bring her back. I brought her back."

 "And her theft, too, I see." He looked at Artoo, still tied to his travois and dragging behind the speeder bike. "Get that droid off your bike," he ordered the scout. "The ground's flat enough here, and I want you on perimeter. Put it with the prisoners. Cuff them, toothey're hardly likely to fall over tree roots out here."

 "Wait a minute," Luke objected as one of the stormtroopers stepped toward him. "Me, too?"

 The major raised his eyebrows slightly. "You got a problem with that, bounty hunter?" he asked, his voice challenging.

 "Yeah, I got a problem with it," Luke shot back. "She'sthe prisoner here, not me."

 "For the moment you're both prisoners," the other countered. "So shut up." He frowned at Luke's face. "What in the Empire happened to you, anyway?"

 So they weren't going to be able to pass the puffiness off as Luke's natural features. "Ran into some kind of bush while I was chasing her," he growled as the stormtrooper roughly cuffed his hands in front of him. "It itched like blazes for a while."

 The major smiled thinly. "How very inconvenient for you," he said dryly. "How fortunate that we have a fully qualified medic back at HQ. He should be able to bring that swelling down in no time." He held Luke's gaze a moment longer, then shifted his attention to the stormtrooper leader. "You disarmed him, of course."

 The stormtrooper gestured, and the first of the biker scouts swooped close to hand Mara's blaster to the major. "Interesting weapon," the major murmured, turning it over in his hands before sliding it into his belt. From overhead came a soft hum, and Luke looked up to see a repulsorlift craft settle into place overhead. A Chariot assault vehicle, just as Mara had predicted. "Ah," the major said, glancing up at it. "All right, Commander. Let's go."

 In many ways, Hyllyard City reminded Luke of Mos Eisley: small houses and commercial buildings crammed fairly tightly together, with relatively narrow streets running between them. The troop headed around the perimeter, clearly aiming for one of the wider avenues that seemed to radiate, spokelike, from the center of town. Looking into the city as they passed by the outer buildings, Luke was able to catch occasional glimpses of what seemed to be an open area a few blocks away. The town square, possibly, or else a spacecraft landing area.

 The vanguard had just reached the target street when, in perfect synchronization, the stormtroopers abruptly changed formation. Those in the inner circle pulled in closer to Luke and Mara while those in the outer circle moved farther away, the whole crowd coming to a halt and gesturing to their prisoners to do the same. A moment later, the reason for the sudden maneuver came around the corner: four scruffy-looking men walking briskly toward them with a fifth man in the center of their square, his hands chained behind him.

 They had barely emerged from the street when they were intercepted by a group of four stormtroopers. A short and inaudible conversation ensued, which concluded with the strangers handing their blasters over to the stormtroopers with obvious reluctance. Escorted now by the Imperials, they continued on toward the main group... and as they walked, Luke finally got a clear look at the prisoner. It was Han Solo.

 The stormtroopers opened their ranks slightly to let the newcomers through. "What do you want?" the major demanded as they stopped in front of him.

 "Name's Chin," one of them said. "We caught this ratch snooping around the forestmaybe looking for your prisoners there. Figured you might want to have a talk with him, hee?"

 "Uncommonly generous of you," the major said sardonically, giving Han a quick, measuring glance. "You come to this conclusion all by yourself?"

 Chin drew himself up. "Just because I don't live in a big flashy city doesn't mean I'm stupid," he said stiffly. "What haiyou think we don't know what it means when Imperial stormtroopers start setting up a temporary garrison?"

 The major gave him a long, cool look. "You'd best just hope that the garrisonis temporary." He glanced at the stormtrooper beside him, jerked his head toward Han. "Check him for weapons."

 "We already" Chin began. The major looked at him, and he fell silent.

 The frisking took only a minute, and came up empty. "Put him in the pocket with the others," the major ordered. "All right, Chin, you and your friends can go. If he turns out to be worth anything, I'll see you get a piece of it."

 "Uncommonly generous of you," Chin said with an expression that was just short of a sneer. "Can we have our guns back now?"

 The major's expression hardened. "You can pick them up later at our HQ," he said. "Hyllyard Hotel, straight across the squarebut I'm sure a sophisticated citizen like yourself already knows where it is."

 For a moment Chin seemed inclined to argue the point. But a glance at the stormtroopers clustered around evidently changed his mind for him. Without a word he turned, and he and his three companions strode back toward the city.

 "Move out," the major ordered, and they started up again.

 "Well," Han muttered, falling into step beside Luke. "Together again, huh?"

 "I wouldn't miss it," Luke muttered back. "Your friends there seem in a hurry to get away."

 "Probably don't want to miss the party," Han told him. "A little something they threw together to celebrate my capture."

 Luke threw him a sideways look. "Shame we weren't invited."

 "Real shame," Han agreed with a straight face. "You never know, though."

 They had turned into the avenue now, moving toward the center of town. Just visible over the heads of the stormtroopers, he could see something gray and rounded directly ahead of them. Craning his neck for a better view, he saw that the structure was in fact a freestanding archway, rising from the ground near the far end of the open village square he had noticed earlier.

 A fairly impressive archway, too, especially for a city this far outside the mainstream of the galaxy. The upper part was composed of different types of fitted stone, the crown flaring outward like a cross between an umbrella and a section of sliced mushroom. The lower part curved in and downward, to end in a pair of meter-square supporting pillars on each side. The entire arch rose a good ten meters into the sky, with the distance between the pillars perhaps half that. Lying directly in front of it was the village square, a fifteen-meter expanse of empty ground.

 The perfect place for an ambush.

 Luke felt his stomach tighten. The perfect place for an ambush... except that if it was obvious to him, it must be obvious to the stormtroopers, as well.

 And it was. The vanguard of the party had reached the square now, and as the stormtroopers moved out of the confines of the narrow avenue, each lifted his blaster rifle a little higher and moved a little farther apart from his fellows. They were expecting an ambush, all right. And they were expecting it right here.

 Gritting his teeth, Luke focused again on the archway. "Is Threepio here?" he muttered to Han.

 He sensed Han's frown, but the other didn't waste time with unnecessary questions. "He's with Lando, yeah."

 Luke nodded and glanced down to his right. Beside him, Artoo was rolling along the bumpy street, trying hard to keep up. Bracing himself, Luke took a step in that direction

 And with a squeal, Artoo tripped over Luke's outstretched foot and fell flat with a crash.

 Luke was crouched beside him in an instant, leaning over him as he struggled with his manacled hands to get the little droid upright again. He sensed some of the stormtroopers moving forward to assist, but for that single moment, there was no one else close enough to hear him. "Artoo, call to Threepio," he breathed into the droid's audio receptor. "Tell him to wait until we're at the archway to attack."

 The droid complied instantly, its loud warble nearly deafening Luke as he crouched there beside him. Luke's head was still ringing when rough hands grabbed him under the arms and hauled him to his feet. He regained his balance

 To find the major standing in front of him, a suspicious scowl on his face. "What was that?" the other demanded.

 "He fell over," Luke told him. "I think he tripped"

 "I meant that transmission," the major cut him off harshly. "What did he say?"

 "He was probably telling me off for tripping him," Luke shot back. "How shouldI know what he said?"

 For a long minute the major glared at him. "Move out, Commander," he said at last to the stormtrooper at his side. "Everyone stay alert."

 He turned away, and they started walking again. "I hope," Han murmured from beside him, "you know what you're doing."

 Luke took a deep breath and fixed his eyes on the archway ahead. "So do I," he murmured back.

 In a very few minutes, he knew, they would both find out.

 

 Chapter 29

 "Oh, my!" Threepio gasped. "General Calrissian, I have"

 "Quiet, Threepio," Lando ordered, peering carefully around the edge of the window at the minor commotion going on across the square. "Did you see what happened, Aves?"

 Crouched down beneath the windowsill, Aves shook his head. "Looked like Skywalker and his droid both fell over," he said. "Couldn't tell for suretoo many stormtroopers in the way."

 "General Calrissian"

 "Quiet,Threepio." Lando watched tensely as two stormtroopers pulled Luke to his feet, then righted Artoo. "Looks like they're okay."

 "Yeah." Aves reached down to the floor beside him, picked up the small transmitter. "Here we go. Let's hope everyone's ready."

 "And that Chin and the others aren't still carrying their blasters," Lando added under his breath.

 Aves snorted. "They aren't. Don't worrystormtroopers are always confiscating other people's weapons."

 Lando nodded, adjusting his grip on his blaster, wishing they could get this over with. Across the way, the Imperials seemed to have gotten themselves sorted out and were starting to move again. As soon as they were all inside the square, away from any possible cover...

 "General Calrissian, Imust speak to you," Threepio insisted. "I have a message from Master Luke."

 Lando blinked at him. "FromLuke? "

 but even as he said it he suddenly remembered that electronic wail from Artoo just after he'd fallen over. Could that have been? "What is it?"

 "Master Luke wants you to hold off the attack," Threepio said, obviously relieved that someone was finally listening to him. "He says you're to wait until the stormtroopers are at the arch before firing."

 Aves twisted around. "What? That's crazy. They outnumber us three to onewe give them any chance at all at cover and they'll cut us to pieces."

 Lando looked out the window, grinding his teeth together. Aves was righthe knew enough of ground tactics to realize that. But on the other hand... "They're awfully spread out out there," he said. "Cover or no cover, they're going to be hard to take out. Especially with those speeder bikes on their perimeter."

 Aves shook his head. "It's crazy," he repeated. "I'm not going to risk my people that way."

 "Luke knows what he's doing," Lando insisted. "He's a Jedi."

 "He's not a Jedi now," Aves snorted. "Didn't Karrde explain about the ysalamiri?"

 "Whether he has Jedi powers or not, he's still a Jedi," Lando insisted. His blaster, he realized suddenly, was pointed at Aves. But that was okay, because Aves's blaster was pointed at him, too. "Anyway, his life is more on the line here than any of yoursyou can always abort and pull back."

 "Oh, sure," Aves snorted, throwing a glance out the window. The Imperials were nearing the middle of the square now, Lando saw, the stormtroopers looking wary and alert as anything. "Except that if we leave any of them alive, they'll seal off the city. And what about that Chariot up there?"

 "What about it?" Lando countered. "I still haven't heard how you're planning to take it out."

 "Well, we sure as blazes don't want it on the ground," Aves retorted. "And that's what'll happen if we let the stormtroopers get to the arch. The Chariot'll put down right across the front of it, right between us and them. That, plus the arch itself, will give them all the cover they need to sit back and take us out at their leisure." He shook his head and shifted his grip on the transmitter. "Anyway, it's too late to clue in the others to any plan changes."

 "You don't have to clue them in," Lando said, feeling sweat collecting under his collar. Luke was counting on him. "No one's supposed to do anything until you trigger the booby-trapped weapons."

 Aves shook his head again. "It's too risky." He turned back to the window, raised the transmitter.

 And here, Lando realizedright herewas where it all came down to the wire. Where you decided who or what it was you trusted. Tactics and abstract logic... or people. Lowering his blaster, he gently rested the tip of the muzzle against Aves's neck. "We wait," he said quietly.

 Aves didn't move; but suddenly there was something in the way he crouched there that reminded Lando of a hunting predator. "I won't forget this, Calrissian," he said, his voice icy soft.

 "I wouldn't want you to," Lando said. He looked out at the stormtroopers... and hoped that Luke did indeed know what he was doing.

 

 The vanguard had already passed the archway, and the major was only a few steps away from it, when four of the stormtroopers abruptly blew up.

 Quite spectacularly, too. The simultaneous flashes of yellow-white fire lit up the landscape to almost painful intensity; the thunderclap of the multiple detonations nearly knocked Luke over.

 The sound was still ringing in his ears when the blasters opened up behind them.

 The stormtroopers were good, all right. There was no panic that Luke could detect; no sudden freezing in astonishment or indecision. They were moving into combat position almost before the blaster fire had begun: those already at the archway hugging close to the stone pillars to return covering fire, the rest moving quickly to join them. Above the sound of the blasters, he could hear the increased whine of the speeder bikes kicking into high speed; overhead, he caught just a glimpse of the Chariot assault vehicle swiveling around to face the unseen attackers.

 And then an armored hand caught him under each armpit, and suddenly he was being hauled toward the archway. A few seconds later he was dumped unceremoniously in the narrow gap between the two pillars supporting the north side of the arch. Mara was already crouched there; a second later, two more stormtroopers tossed Han in to join them. Four of the Imperials moved into position over them, using the pillars for cover as they began returning fire. Struggling to his knees, Luke leaned out for a look.

 Out in the fire zone, looking small and helpless amid the deadly horizontal hail of blaster fire, Artoo was rolling toward them as fast as his little wheels would carry him.

 "I think we're in trouble," Han muttered in his ear. "Not to mention Lando and the others."

 "It's not over yet," Luke told him tightly. "Just stick close. How are you at causing distractions?"

 "Terrific," Han said; and to Luke's surprise, he brought his hands out from behind his back, the chain and manacles he'd been wearing hanging loosely from his left wrist. "Trick cuffs," he grunted, pulling a concealed strip of metal from the inside of the open cuff and probing at Luke's restraints. "I hope this thingah." The pressure on Luke's wrists was suddenly gone; the cuffs opened and dropped to the ground. "You ready for your distraction?" Han asked, taking the loose end of his chain in his free hand.

 "Hang on a minute," Luke told him, looking up. Most of the speeder bikes had taken refuge under the arch, looking like some strange species of giant birds hiding from a storm as they hovered close to the stone, their laser cannon spitting toward the surrounding houses. In front of them and just below their line of fire, the Chariot had swiveled parallel to the arch and was coming down. Once it was on the ground...

 A hand gripped Luke's arm, fingernails digging hard into the skin. "Whatever you're going to do,do it!" Mara hissed viciously. "If the Chariot gets down, you'll never get them out from cover."

 "I know," Luke nodded. "I'm counting on it."

 

 The Chariot settled smoothly to the ground directly in front of the arch, blocking the last of the attackers' firing vectors. Crouched at the window, Aves swore violently. "Well, there's your Jedi for you," he bit out. "You got any other great ideas, Calrissian?"

 Lando swallowed hard. "We've just got to give him"

 He never finished the sentence. From the arch a blaster bolt glanced off the window frame, and suddenly Lando's upper arm flashed with pain. The shock sent him stumbling backward, just as a second shot blew apart that whole section of the frame, driving wooden splinters and chunks of masonry like shrapnel across his chest and arm.

 He hit the floor, landing hard enough to see stars. Blinking, gritting his teeth against the pain, he looked up

 To find Aves leaning over him.

 Lando looked up into the other's face.I won't forget this, Aves had said, no more than three minutes ago. And from the look on his face, he wasn't anticipating any need to hold that memory for much longer. "He'll come through," Lando whispered through the pain. "He will."

 But he could tell that Aves wasn't listening... and, down deep, Lando couldn't blame him. Lando Calrissian, the professional gambler, had gambled one last time. And he'd lost.

 And the debt from that gamblethe last in a long line of such debtshad come due.

 

 The Chariot settled smoothly to the ground directly in front of the arch, and Luke got his feet under him. This was it. "All right, Han," he muttered. "Go."

 Han nodded and surged to his feet, coming up right in the middle of the four stormtroopers standing over them. With a bellow, he swung his former shackles full across the faceplate of the nearest guard, then threw the looped chain around the neck of the next and pulled backwards, away from the pillars. The other two reacted instantly, leaping after him and taking the whole group down in a tangle.

 And for the next few seconds, Luke was free.

 He stood up and leaned out to look around the pillar. Artoo was still in the middle of no-man's-land, hurrying to reach cover before he could be hit by a stray shot. He warbled plaintively as he saw Luke

 "Artoo!now!" Luke shouted, holding out his hand and glancing across toward the southern end of the archway. Between the stone pillars and the grounded Chariot, the stormtroopers were indeed solidly entrenched. If this didn't work, Han was right: Lando and everyone else out there were dead. Gritting his teeth, hoping fervently that his counterattack wasn't already too late, he turned back to Artoo

 Just as, with a flicker of silver metal and perfect accuracy, his lightsaber dropped neatly into his outstretched hand.

 Beside him, the guards had subdued Han's crazy attack and were getting back to their feet, leaving Han on his knees between them. Luke took them all in a single sweep, the blazing green lightsaber blade slicing through the glistening stormtrooper armor with hardly a tug to mark its passing. "Get behind me," he snapped to Han and Mara, stepping back to the gap between the two northern pillars and focusing on the mass of Imperials standing and crouching between him and the southern pillars. They were suddenly aware that they had an unexpected threat on their flank, and a few were already starting to bring their blasters to bear on him.

 With the Force to guide his hand, he could have held out against them indefinitely, blocking their blaster shots with the lightsaber. Mara had been right, though: the ysalamiri effect did indeed extend this far outside the forest, and the Force was still silent.

 But then, he'd never had any intention of fighting the stormtroopers anyway. Turning his back on the blasters tracking toward him, he slashed the lightsaber across and upward

 Neatly slicing one of the stone pillars in half.

 There was a loudcrack as suddenly released tension sent a shiver through the structure. Another stroke cut through the second pillar

 And the noise of the battle was abruptly drowned out by the awful grinding of stone on stone as the two fractured pillars began sliding apart.

 Luke swung back around, peripherally aware of Han and Mara scrambling out from under the arch to safety behind him. The stormtroopers' expressions were hidden behind their masks, but the look of sudden horror on the major's face said it for all of them. Overhead, the mass of the arch creaked warningly; setting his teeth, Luke locked the lightsaber on and hurled it across the gap toward the pillars there. It cut through one of them and nicked the other

 And with a roar, the whole thing came crashing down.

 Luke, standing at the edge, barely got out from under it in time. The stormtroopers, crouched in the center, didn't.

 

 Chapter 30

 Karrde walked around the mass of stone to where the crumpled nose of the Chariot assault vehicle poked out, a sense of slightly stunned disbelief coloring his vision. "One man," he murmured.

 "Well,we helped some," Aves reminded him. But the sarcasm of the words faded beneath the grudging respect clearly there behind it.

 "And without the Force, too," Karrde said.

 He sensed Aves shrug uncomfortably. "That's what Mara said. Though of course Skywalker might have lied to her about it."

 "Unlikely." A motion at the edge of the square caught his eye, and Karrde looked over to see Solo and Skywalker helping a distinctly shaky-looking Lando Calrissian to one of the airspeeders parked around the perimeter. "Took a shot, did he?"

 Aves grunted. "Came close to taking one of mine, too," he said. "I thought he'd betrayed usfigured I'd make sure he didn't walk away from it."

 "In restrospect, it's just as well you didn't." Karrde looked up, searching the skies. Wondering how long it would take the Imperials to respond to what had happened here today.

 Aves looked up, too. "We might still be able to hunt down the other two Chariots before they get a chance to report," he suggested. "I don't think the headquarters people got any messages away before we took them out."

 Karrde shook his head, feeling a deep surge of sadness rising through the sense of urgency within him. Not until now had he truly realized just how much he'd come to love this placehis base, the forest, the planet Myrkr itself. Now, when there was no choice but to abandon it. "No," he told Aves. "There's no way to cover up our part in what happened here. Not from a man like Thrawn."

 "You're probably right," Aves said, his voice taking on a sense of urgency of its own. He understood the implications of that, all right. "You want me to head back and start the evacuation?"

 "Yes. And take Mara with you. Make sure she keeps busysomewhere away from theMillennium Falcon and Skywalker's X-wing."

 He felt Aves's eyes on him. But if the other wondered, he kept his wonderings to himself. "Right. See you later."

 He hurried away. The airspeeder with Calrissian aboard was lifting off now, heading back to where theFalcon was being prepped for flight. Solo and Skywalker were heading over toward a second airspeeder; with just a moment's hesitation, Karrde went over to intercept them.

 They reached the craft at the same time, and for a moment eyed each other across its bow. "Karrde," Solo said at last. "I owe you one."

 Karrde nodded. "Are you still going to get theEtherway out of impoundment for me?"

 "I said I would," Solo told him. "Where do you want it delivered?"

 "Just leave it on Abregado. Someone will pick it up." He turned his attention to Skywalker. "An interesting little trick," he commented, tilting his head back toward the mass of rubble. "Unorthodox, to say the least."

 Skywalker shrugged. "It worked," he said simply.

 "That it did," Karrde agreed. "Likely saving several of my people's lives in the bargain."

 Skywalker looked him straight back in the eye. "Does that mean you've made your decision?"

 Karrde gave him a slight smile. "I don't really see as I have much choice anymore." He looked back at Solo. "I presume you'll be leaving immediately?"

 "As soon as we can get Luke's X-wing rigged for towing," Solo nodded, "Lando's doing okay, but he's going to need more specialized medical attention than theFalcon can handle."

 "It could have been worse," Karrde said.

 Solo gave him a knowing look. "Alot worse," he agreed, his voice hard.

 "So could all of it," Karrde reminded him, putting an edge into his own voice. He could, after all, just as easily have turned the three of them over to the Imperials in the first place.

 And Solo knew it. "Yeah," he conceded. "Well... so long."

 Karrde watched as they got into the airspeeder. "One other thing," he said as they strapped in. "Obviously, we're going to have to pull out of here before the Imperials figure out what's happened. That means a lot of lifting capacity if we're going to do it quickly. You wouldn't happen to have any surplus cargo or stripped-down military ships lying around I could have, would you?"

 Solo gave him a strange look. "We don't have enough cargo capacity for the New Republic's normal business," he said. "I think I might have mentioned that to you."

 "Well, then, a loan, perhaps," Karrde persisted. "A stripped-down Mon Calamari Star Cruiser would do nicely."

 "I'm sure it would," Solo returned with more than a hint of sarcasm. "I'll see what I can do."

 The canopy dropped smoothly down over them and sealed in place. Karrde stepped back, and with a whine of repulsorlifts, the airspeeder rose into the sky. Orienting itself, it shot off toward the forest.

 Karrde watched it go, wondering if that last suggestion had been too little too late. But perhaps not. Solo was the type to hold debts of honor sacredsomething he'd probably picked up from his Wookiee friend somewhere along the line. If he could find a spare Star Cruiser, he'd likely send it along.

 And once here, it would be easy enough to steal from whatever handlers Solo sent with it. Perhaps such a gift would help assuage Grand Admiral Thrawn's inevitable anger over what had happened here today.

 But then, perhaps it wouldn't.

 Karrde looked back at the ruins of the collapsed arch, a shiver running through him. No, a warship wasn't going to help. Not on this. Thrawn had lost too much here to simply shrug it off as the fortunes of war. He would be back... and he would be coming for blood.

 And for perhaps the first time in his life, Karrde felt the unpleasant stirrings of genuine fear.

 In the distance, the airspeeder disappeared over the forest canopy. Karrde turned and gave Hyllyard City one final, lingering look. One way or the other, he knew he would never see it again.

 

 Luke got Lando settled into one of theFalcon 's bunks while Han and a couple of Karrde's men busied themselves outside getting a tow cable attached to the X-wing. TheFalcon 's medical package was fairly primitive, but it was up to the task of cleaning and bandaging a blaster burn. A complete healing job would have to wait until they could get him to a bacta tank, but for the moment he seemed comfortable enough. Leaving Artoo and Threepio to watch over himdespite his protestations that he didn't need watching over and, furthermore, had had enough of ThreepioLuke returned to the cockpit just as the ship lifted off.

 "Any problems with the tow cable?" he asked, sliding into the copilot's seat.

 "Not so far," Han said, leaning forward and looking all around them as theFalcon cleared the trees. "The extra weight's not bothering us, anyway. We should be all right."

 "Good. You expecting company?"

 "You never know," Han said, giving the sky one last look before settling back into his seat and gunning the repulsorlifts. "Karrde said there were still a couple of Chariots and a few speeder bikes unaccounted for. One of them might have figured that a last-ditch suicide run was better than having to go back to the Grand Admiral and report."

 Luke stared at him. "Grand Admiral?" he asked carefully.

 Han's lip twisted. "Yeah. That's who seems to be running the show now for the Empire."

 A cold chill ran up Luke's back. "I thought we'd accounted for all the Grand Admirals."

 "Me, too. We must have missed one."

 And abruptly, right in the middle of Han's last word, Luke felt a surge of awareness and strength fill him. As if he were waking up from a deep sleep, or stepping from a dark room into the light, or suddenly understanding the universe again.

 The Force was again with him.

 He took a deep breath, eyes flicking across the control board for the altimeter. Just over twelve kilometers. Karrde had been rightthose ysalamiri did, indeed, reinforce one another. "I don't suppose you got a name," he murmured.

 "Karrde wouldn't give it to me," Han said, throwing a curious frown in Luke's direction. "Maybe we can bargain the use of that Star Cruiser he wants for it. You okay?"

 "I'm fine," Luke assured him. "I justit's like being able to see again after having been blind."

 Han snorted under his breath. "Yeah, I know how that is," he said wryly.

 "I guess you would." Luke looked at him. "I didn't get a chance to say this earlier... but thanks for coming after me."

 Han waved it away. "No charge. AndI didn't get a chance to say it earlier" he glanced at Luke again "but you look like something the proom dragged in."

 "My wonderful disguise," Luke told him, touching his face gingerly. "Mara assures me it'll wear off in a few more hours."

 "YeahMara," Han said. "You and she seemed to be hitting it off pretty well there."

 Luke grimaced. "Don't count on it," he said. "A matter of having a common enemy, that's all. First the forest, then the Imperials."

 He could sense Han casting around for a way to ask the next question, decided to save him the trouble. "She wants to kill me," he told the other.

 "Any idea why?"

 Luke opened his mouth... and, to his own surprise, closed it again. There wasn't any particular reason not to tell Han what he knew about Mara's pastcertainly no reason he could think of. And yet, somehow, he felt a strangely compelling reluctance to do so. "It's something personal," he said at last.

 Han threw him an odd look. "Somethingpersonal? How personal can a death mark get?"

 "It's not a death mark," Luke insisted. "It's somethingwell,personal ."

 Han gazed at him a moment longer, then turned back to his piloting. "Oh," he said.

 TheFalcon had cleared the atmosphere now and was gunning for deep space. From this high up, Luke decided, the forest looked rather pleasant. "You know, I never did find out what planet this was," he commented.

 "It's called Myrkr," Han told him. "AndI just found out this morning. I think Karrde must have already decided to abandon the place, even before the battlehe had real tight security around it when Lando and I first got here."

 A few minutes later a light flashed on the control board: theFalcon was far enough out of Myrkr's gravity well for the hyperdrive to function. "Good," Han nodded at it. "Course's already programmed in; let's get out of here." He wrapped his hand around the central levers and pulled; and with a burst of starlines, they were off.

 "Where are we going?" Luke asked as the starlines faded into the familiar mottled sky. "Coruscant?"

 "A little side trip first," Han said. "I want to swing by the Sluis Van shipyards, see if we can get Lando and your X-wing fixed up."

 Luke threw him a sideways glance. "And maybe find a Star Cruiser to borrow for Karrde?"

 "Maybe," Han said, a little defensively. "I mean, Ackbar's got a bunch of stripped-down warships ferrying stuff to the Sluis sector already. No reason why we can't borrow one of them for a couple of days, is there?"

 "Probably not," Luke conceded with a sigh. Suddenly, it felt really good to just sit back and do nothing. "I suppose Coruscant can do without us for a few more days."

 "I hope so," Han said, his voice abruptly grim. "But something's about to happen back there. If it hasn't happened already."

 And his sense was as grim as his words. "Maybe we shouldn't bother with Sluis Van, then," Luke suggested, feeling a sympathetic shiver. "Lando's hurting, but he's not in any danger."

 Han shook his head. "No. I want to get him taken care ofandyou , buddy, need some downtime, too," he added, glancing at Luke. "I just wanted you to know that when we hit Coruscant, we're going to hit it running. So enjoy Sluis Van while you can. It'll probably be the last peace and quiet you'll get for a while."

 

 In the blackness of deep space, three-thousandths of a light-year out from the Sluis Van shipyards, the task force assembled for battle.

 "TheJudicator has just reported in, Captain," the communications officer told Pellaeon. "They confirm battle ready, and request order update."

 "Inform Captain Brandei that there have been no changes," Pellaeon told him, standing at the starboard viewport and gazing out at the shadowy shapes gathered around theChimaera , all but the closest identifiable only by the distinctive patterns of their running lights. It was an impressive task force, one worthy of the old days: five Imperial Star Destroyers, twelveStrike -class cruisers, twenty-two of the oldCarrack -class light cruisers, and thirty full squadrons of TIE fighters standing ready in their hangar bays.

 And riding there in the middle of all that awesome firepower, like someone's twisted idea of a joke, sat the battered old A-class bulk freighter.

 The key to this whole operation.

 "Status, Captain?" Thrawn's voice came quietly from behind him.

 Pellaeon turned to face the Grand Admiral. "All ships are on line, sir," he reported. "The freighter's cloaking shield has been checked out and primed; all TIE fighters are prepped and manned. I think we're ready."

 Thrawn nodded, his glowing eyes sweeping the field of running lights around them. "Excellent," he murmured. "What word from Myrkr?"

 The question threw Pellaeon off stridehe hadn't thought about Myrkr for days. "I don't know, Admiral," he confessed, looking over Thrawn's shoulder at the communications officer. "Lieutenantthe last report from the Myrkr landing force?"

 The other was already calling up the record. "It was a routine report, sir," he said. "Time log... fourteen hours ten minutes ago."

 Thrawn turned to face him. "Fourteen hours?" he repeated, his voice suddenly very quiet and very deadly. "I left orders for them to report every twelve."

 "Yes, Admiral," the comm man said, starting to look a little nervous. "I have that order logged, right here on their file. They must have..." He trailed off, looking helplessly at Pellaeon.

 They must have forgotten to report in,was Pellaeon's first, hopeful reaction. But it died stillborn. Stormtroopers didn't forget such things. Ever. "Perhaps they're having trouble with their transmitter," he suggested hesitantly.

 For a handful of heartbeats Thrawn just stood there, silent. "No," he said at last. "They've been taken. Skywalker was indeed there."

 Pellaeon hesitated, shook his head. "I can't believe that, sir," he said. "Skywalker couldn't have taken all of them. Not with all those ysalamiri blocking his Jedi power."

 Thrawn turned those glittering eyes back on Pellaeon. "I agree," he said coldly. "Obviously, he had help."

 Pellaeon forced himself to meet that gaze. "Karrde?"

 "Who else was there?" Thrawn countered. "So much for his protestations of neutrality."

 Pellaeon glanced at the status board. "Perhaps we should send someone to investigate. We could probably spare a Strike Cruiser; maybe even theStormhawk ."

 Thrawn took a deep breath, let it out slowly. "No," he said, his voice steady and controlled again. "The Sluis Van operation is our primary concern at the momentand battles have been lost before on the presence or absence of a single ship. Karrde and his betrayal will keep for later."

 He turned back to the communications officer. "Signal the freighter," he ordered. "Have them activate the cloaking shield."

 "Yes, sir."

 Pellaeon turned back to the viewport. The freighter, bathed in theChimera 's lights, just sat there looking innocent. "Cloaking shield on, Admiral," the comm man reported.

 Thrawn nodded. "Order them to proceed."

 "Yes, sir." Moving rather sluggishly, the freighter maneuvered past theChimaera , oriented itself toward the distant sun of the Sluis Van system, and with a flicker of pseudovelocity jumped to lightspeed.

 "Time mark," Thrawn ordered.

 "Time marked," one of the deck officers acknowledged.

 Thrawn looked at Pellaeon. "Is my flagship ready, Captain?" he asked the formal question.

 "TheChimaera is fully at your command, Admiral," Pellaeon gave the formal answer.

 "Good. We follow the freighter in exactly six hours twenty minutes. I want a final check from all ships... and I want you to remind them one last time that our task is only to engage and pin down the system's defenses. There are to be no special heroics or risks taken. Make that clearly understood, Captain. We're here to gain ships, not lose them."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon started toward his command station

 "And Captain...?"

 "Yes, Admiral?"

 There was a tight smile on Thrawn's face. "Remind them, too," he added softly, "that our final victory over the Rebellion begins here."

 

 Chapter 31

 Captain Afyon of the Escort FrigateLarkhess shook his head with thinly disguised contempt, glaring at Wedge from the depths of his pilot's seat. "You X-wing hotshots," he growled. "You've really got it madeyou know that?"

 Wedge shrugged, trying hard not to take offense. It wasn't easy; but then, he'd had lots of practice in the past few days. Afyon had started out from Coruscant with a planetary-mass chip on his shoulder, and he'd been nursing it the whole way.

 And looking out the viewport at the confused mass of ships crowding the Sluis Van orbit-dock area, it wasn't hard to figure out why. "Yeah, well, we're stuck out here, too," he reminded the captain.

 The other snorted. "Yeah. Big sacrifice. You lounge around my ship like overpriced trampers for a couple of days, then flit around for two hours while I try to dodge bulk freighters and get this thing into a docking station designed for scavenger pickers. And then you pull your snubbies back inside and go back to lounging again. Doesn't exactly qualify as earning your pay, in my book."

 Wedge clamped his teeth firmly around his tongue and stirred his tea a little harder. It was considered bad form to mouth back at senior officers, after alleven senior officers who'd long since passed their prime. For probably the first time since he had been given command of Rogue Squadron, he regretted having passed up all the rest of the promotions he'd been offered. A higher rank would at least have entitled him to snarl back a little.

 Lifting his cup for a cautious sip, he gazed out the viewport at the scene around them. No, he amendedhe wasn't sorry at all that he'd stayed with his X-wing. If he hadn't, he'd probably be in exactly the same position as Afyon was right now: trying to run a 920-crew ship with just fifteen men, hauling cargo in a ship meant for war.

 And, like as not, having to put up with hotshot X-wing pilots who sat around his bridge drinking tea and claiming with perfect justification that they were doing exactly what they'd been ordered to do.

 He hid a smile behind his mug. Yes, in Afyon's place, he'd probably be ready to spit bulkhead shavings, too. Maybe he ought to go ahead and let the other drag him into an argument, in fact, let him drain off some of that excess nervous energy of his. Eventuallywithin the hour, even, if Sluis Control's latest departure estimate was anywhere closeit would finally be theLarkhess 's turn to get out of here and head for Bpfassh. It would be nice, when that time came, for Afyon to be calm enough to handle the ship.

 Taking another sip of his tea, Wedge looked out the viewport. A couple of refitted passenger liners were making their own break for freedom now, he saw, accompanied by four Corellian Corvettes. Beyond them, just visible in the faint light of the space-lane marker buoys, was what looked like one of the slightly ovoid transports he used to escort during the height of the war, with a pair of B-wings following.

 And off to the side, moving parallel to their departure vector, an A-class bulk freighter was coming into the docking pattern.

 Without any escort at all.

 Wedge watched it creep toward them, his smile fading as old combat senses began to tingle. Swiveling around in his seat, he reached over to the console beside him and punched for a sensor scan.

 It looked innocent enough. An older freighter, probably a knockoff of the original Corellian Action IV design, with the kind of exterior that came from either a lifetime of honest work or else a short and spectacularly unsuccessful career of piracy. Its cargo bay registered completely empty, and there were no weapons emplacements that theLarkhess 's sensors could pick up.

 A totally empty freighter. How long had it been, he wondered uneasily, since he'd run across a totally empty freighter?

 "Trouble?"

 Wedge focused on the captain in mild surprise. The other's frustrated anger of a minute ago was gone, replaced by something calm, alert, and battle-ready. Perhaps, the thought strayed through Wedge's mind, Afyon wasn't past his prime after all. "That incoming freighter," he told the other, setting his cup down on the edge of the console and keying for a comm channel. "There's something about it that doesn't feel right."

 The captain peered out the viewport, then at the sensor scan data Wedge had pulled up. "I don't see anything," he said.

 "Me, either," Wedge had to admit. "There's just something... Blast."

 "What?"

 "Control won't let me in," Wedge told him as he keyed off. "Too much traffic on the circuits already, they say."

 "Allow me." Afyon turned to his own console. The freighter was shifting course now, the kind of slow and careful maneuver that usually indicated a full load. But the cargo bay was still registering empty...

 "There we go," Afyon said, glancing at Wedge with grim satisfaction. "I've got a tap into their records computer. Little trick you never learn flitting around in an X-wing. Let's see now... freighterNartissteu , out of Nellac Kram. They were jumped by pirates, got their main drive damaged in the fight, and had to dump their cargo to get away. They're hoping to get some repair work done; Sluis Control's basically told them to get in line."

 "I thought all this relief shipping had more or less taken over the whole place," Wedge frowned.

 Afyon shrugged. "Theoretically. In practice... well, the Sluissi are easy enough to talk into bending that kind of rule. You just have to know how to phrase the request."

 Reluctantly, Wedge nodded. Itdid all seem reasonable enough, he supposed. And a damaged, empty ship would probably handle something like an intact full one. And the freighterwas emptytheLarkhess 's sensors said so.

 But the tingles refused to go away.

 Abruptly, he dug his comlink from his belt. "Rogue Squadron, this is Rogue Leader," he called. "Everyone to your ships."

 He got acknowledgments, looked up to find Afyon's eyes steady on him. "You still think there's trouble?" the other asked quietly.

 Wedge grimaced, throwing one last look out the viewport at the freighter. "Probably not. But it won't hurt to be ready. Anyway, I can't have my pilots sitting around drinking tea all day." He turned and left the bridge at a quick jog.

 The other eleven members of Rogue Squadron were in their X-wings by the time he reached theLarkhess 's docking bay. Three minutes later, they launched.

 The freighter hadn't made much headway, Wedge saw as they swung up over theLarkhess 's hull and pulled together into a loose patrol formation. Oddly enough, though, it had moved a considerable distance laterally, drifting away from theLarkhess and toward a pair of Calamari Star Cruisers orbiting together a few kilometers away. "Spread out formation," Wedge ordered his pilots, shifting to an asymptotic approach course. "Let's swing by and take a nice, casual little look."

 The others acknowledged. Wedge glanced down at his nav scope, made a minor adjustment to his speed, looked back up again

 And in the space of a single heartbeat, the whole thing went straight to hell.

 The freighter blew up. All at once, without any warning from sensors, without any hint from previous visual observation, it just came apart.

 Reflexively, Wedge jabbed for his comm control. "Emergency!" he barked. "Ship explosion near orbit-dock V-475. Send rescue team."

 For an instant, as chunks of the cargo bay flew outward, he could see into the emptiness there... but even as his eyes and brain registered the odd fact that he could seeinto the disintegrating cargo bay but notbeyond it

 The bay was suddenly no longer empty.

 One of the X-wing pilots gasped. A tight-packed mass of something was in there, totally filling the space where theLarkhess 's sensors had read nothing. A mass that was even now exploding outward like a hornet's nest behind the pieces of the bay.

 A mass that in seconds had resolved itself into a boiling wave front of TIE fighters.

 "Pull up!" Wedge snapped to his squadron, leaning his X-wing into a tight turn to get out of the path of that deadly surge. "Come around and re-form; S-foils in attack position."

 And as they swung around in response, he knew with a sinking feeling that Captain Afyon had been wrong. Rogue Squadron was indeed going to earn its pay today.

 The battle for Sluis Van had begun.

 

 They'd cleared the outer system defense network and the bureaucratic overload that passed for Control at Sluis Van these days, and Han was just getting a bearing on the slot they'd given him when the emergency call came through. "Luke!" he shouted back down the cockpit corridor. "Got a ship explosion. I'm going to go check it out." He glanced at the orbit-dock map to locate V-475, gave the ship a fractional turn to put them on the right vector

 And jerked in his seat as a laser bolt slapped theFalcon hard from behind.

 He had them gunning into a full forward evasive maneuver before the second shot went sizzling past the cockpit. Over the roar of the engines he heard Luke's startled-sounding yelp; and as the third bolt went past he finally had a chance to check the aft sensors to see just what was going on.

 He almost wished he hadn't. Directly behind them, batteries already engaging one of the Sluis Van perimeter battle stations, was an Imperial Star Destroyer.

 He swore under his breath and kicked the engines a little harder. Beside him, Luke clawed his way forward against the not-quite-compensated acceleration and into the copilot's seat. "What's going on?" he asked.

 "We just walked into an Imperial attack," Han growled, eyes flying over the readouts. "Got a Star Destroyer behind usthere's another one over to starboardlooks like some other ships with them."

 "They've got the system bottled up," Luke said, his voice glacially calm. A far cry, Han thought, from the panicky kid he'd pulled off Tatooine out from under Star Destroyer fire all those years back. "I make it five Star Destroyers and something over twenty smaller ships."

 Han grunted. "At least we know now why they hit Bpfassh and the others. Wanted to pull enough ships here to make an attack worth their while."

 The words were barely out of his mouth when the emergency comm channel suddenly came to life again. "Emergency! Imperial TIE fighters in orbit-dock area. All ships to battle stations."

 Luke started. "That sounded like Wedge," he said, punching for transmission. "Wedge? That you?"

 "Luke?" the other came back. "We got trouble hereat least forty TIE fighters and fifty truncated-cone-shaped things I've never seen before"

 He broke off as a screech from the X-wing's etheric rudder came faintly over the speaker. "I hope you've brought a couple wings of fighters with you," he said. "We're going to be a little pressed here."

 Luke glanced at Han. "Afraid it's just Han and me and theFalcon . But we're on our way."

 "Make it fast."

 Luke keyed off the speaker. "Is there any way to get me into my X-wing?" he asked.

 "Not fast enough," Han shook his head. "We're going to have to drop it here and go in alone."

 Luke nodded, getting out of his seat. "I'd better make sure Lando and the droids are strapped in and then get up into the gun well."

 "Take the top one," Han called after him. The upper deflector shields were running stronger at the moment, and Luke would have more protection there.

 If there was any protection to be had from forty TIE fighters and fifty truncated flying cones.

 For a moment he frowned as a strange thought suddenly struck him. But no. They couldn't possibly be Lando's missing mole miners. Even a Grand Admiral wouldn't be crazy enough to try to use something likethat in battle.

 Boosting power to the forward deflectors, he took a deep breath and headed in.

 

 "All ships, commence attack," Pellaeon called. "Full engagement; maintain position and status."

 He got confirmations, turned to Thrawn. "All ships report engaged, sir," he said.

 But the Grand Admiral didn't seem to hear him. He just stood there at the viewport, gazing outward at the New Republic ships scrambling to meet them, his hands gripped tightly behind his back. "Admiral?" Pellaeon asked cautiously.

 "That was them, Captain," Thrawn said, his voice unreadable. "That ship straight ahead. That was theMillennium Falcon . And it was towing an X-wing starfighter behind it."

 Pellaeon frowned past the other. The glow of a drive was indeed barely visible past the flashing laser bolts of the battle, already pretty well out of combat range and trying hard to be even more so. But as to the design of the craft, much less its identity... "Yes, sir," he said, keeping his tone neutral. "Cloak Leader reports a successful breakout, and that the command section of the freighter is making its escape to the periphery. They're encountering some resistance from escort vehicles and a squadron of X-wings, but the general response has so far been weak and diffuse."

 Thrawn took a deep breath and turned away from viewport. "That will change," he told Pellaeon, back in control again. "Remind him not to push his envelope too far, or to waste excessive time in choosing his targets. Also that the spacetrooper mole miners should concentrate on Calamari Star Cruisersthey're likely to have the largest number of defenders aboard." The red eyes glittered. "And inform him that theMillennium Falcon is on its way in."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said. He glanced out the viewport again, at the distant fleeing ship. Towing an X-wing...? "You don't think... Skywalker?"

 Thrawn's face hardened. "We'll know soon," he said quietly. "And if so, Talon Karrde will have a great deal to answer for. Agreat deal."

 

 "Watch it, Rogue Five," Wedge warned as a flash of laser fire from somewhere behind him shot past and nicked the wing of one of the X-wings ahead. "We've picked up a tail."

 "I noticed," the other came back. "Pincer?"

 "On my mark," Wedge confirmed as a second bolt shot past him. Directly ahead, a Calamari Star Cruiser was pulling sluggishly away, trying to get out of the battle zone. Perfect cover for this kind of maneuver. Together, he and Rogue Five dived underneath it

 "Now."Leaning hard on his etheric rudder, he peeled off hard to the right. Rogue Five did the same thing to the left. The pursuing TIE fighter hesitated between his diverging targets a split second too long; and even as he swung around to follow Wedge, Rogue Five blew him out of the sky.

 "Nice shooting," Wedge said, giving the area a quick scan. The TIE fighters still seemed to be everywhere, but for the moment, at least, none of them was close enough to give them any trouble.

 Five noticed that, too. "We seem to be out of it, Rogue Leader," he commented.

 "Easy enough to fix," Wedge told him. His momentum was taking him farther under the Star Cruiser they'd used for cover. Curving up and around it, he started to spiral back toward the main battle area.

 He was just swinging up along the Star Cruiser's side when he noticed the small cone-shaped thing nestled up against the larger ship's hull.

 He craned his neck for a better look as he shot past. It was one of the little craft that had come out with the TIE fighters, all right. Sitting pressed up against the Star Cruiser's bridge blister as if it were welded in place.

 There was a battle going on nearby, a battle in which his people were fighting and very possibly dying. But something told Wedge that this was important. "Hang on a minute," he told Five. "I want to check this out."

 His momentum had already taken him to the Star Cruiser's bow. He curved around in front of the ship, leaning back into a spiral again

 And suddenly his canopy lit up with laser fire, and his X-wing jolted like a startled animal beneath him.

 The Star Cruiser had fired on him.

 In his ear, he heard Five shout something. "Stay back," Wedge snapped, fighting against a sudden drop in power and giving his scopes a quick scan. "I'm hit, but not bad."

 "They fired on you!"

 "Yeah, I know," Wedge said, trying to maintain some kind of evasive maneuvering with what little control he had left. Fortunately, the systems were starting to come back on line as his R2 unit did some fast rerouting. Even more fortunately, the Star Cruiser didn't seem inclined to shoot at him again.

 But why had it fired in the first place?

 Unless...

 His own R2 was too busy with rerouting chores to handle anything else at the moment. "Rogue Five, I need a fast sensor scan," he called. "Where are the rest of those cone things?"

 "Hang on, I'll check," the other replied. "Scope shows... I don't find more than about fifteen of them. Nearest one's ten kilometers awaybearing one-one-eight mark four."

 Wedge felt something hard settle into his stomach. Fifteen, out of the fifty that had been in that freighter with the TIE fighters. So where had the rest of them gone? "Let's go take a look," he said, turning into an intercept vector.

 The cone thing was heading toward another Escort Frigate like theLarkhess , he saw, with four TIE fighters running interference for it. Not that there was much potential for interference if the Frigate was manned anywhere near as sparsely as theLarkhess , it would have precious little chance of fighting back. "Let's see if we can take them before they notice us," he told Five as they closed the distance.

 Abruptly, all four TIE fighters peeled off and came around. So much for surprise. "Take the two on the right, Rogue Five; I'll take the others."

 "Copy."

 Wedge waited until the last second before firing on the first of his targets, swinging around instantly to avoid collision with the other. It swept past beneath him, his X-wing shuddering as it took another hit. He leaned hard into the turn, catching a glimpse of the TIE fighter dropping into a pursuit slot as he did so

 And suddenly something shot past him, spitting laser fire and twisting back and around in some kind of insane variant on a drunkard's-walk evasive maneuver. The TIE fighter caught a direct hit and blew into a spectacular cloud of fiery gas. Wedge finished his turn, just as Rogue Five's second target fighter did likewise.

 "All clear, Wedge," a familiar voice called into his ear. "You damaged?"

 "I'm fine, Luke," Wedge assured him. "Thanks."

 "Lookthere it goes," Han's voice cut in. "Over by the Frigate. It's one of Lando's mole miners, all right."

 "I see it," Luke said. "What's it doing out here?"

 "I saw one stuck onto the Star Cruiser back there," Wedge told him, swinging back on course for the Frigate. "Looks like this one's trying to do the same thing. I don't know why."

 "Whatever it's doing, let's stop it," Han said.

 "Right."

 It was, Wedge saw, going to be a close race; but it was quickly clear that the mole miner was going to win it. Already it had turned its base around toward the Frigate and was starting to nestle up against the hull.

 And just before it closed the gap completely, he caught a glimpse of an acridly brilliant light.

 "What wasthat ?" Luke asked.

 "I don't know," Wedge said, blinking away the afterimage. "It looked too bright for laser fire."

 "It was a plasma jet," Han grunted as theFalcon came up alongside him. "Right on top of the bridge emergency escape hatch. That's what they wanted the mole miners for. They're using them to burn through the hulls"

 He broke off; and, abruptly, he swore. "Lukewe got it backwards. They're not here to wreck the fleet.

 "They're here tosteal it."

 

 For a long heartbeat Luke just stared at the Frigate... and then, like pieces clicking together in a puzzle, it all fell into place. The mole miners, the undermanned and underdefended capital ships that the New Republic had been forced to press into shipping service, the Imperial fleet out there that seemed to be making no real effort to push its way past the system's defenses

 And a New Republic Star Cruiser, mole miner planted firmly on its side, that had just fired on Wedge's X-wing.

 He took a moment to scan the sky around him. Moving with deceptive slowness through the continuing starfighter battle, a number of warships were beginning to pull out. "We've got to stop them," he told the others.

 "Good thinking," Han agreed. "How?"

 "Is there any way we can get aboard them ourselves?" he asked. "Lando said the mole miners were two-man shipsthe Imperials can't possibly have packed more than four or five stormtroopers in each one of them."

 "The way those warships are manned at the moment, four stormtroopers would be plenty," Wedge pointed out.

 "Yes, but I could take them," Luke said.

 "On all fifty ships?" Han countered. "Besides, you blast a hatch open to vacuum and you'll have pressure bulkheads closing all over the ship. Take you forever to even get to the bridge."

 Luke gritted his teeth; but Han was right. "Then we have to disable them," he said. "Knock out their engines or control systems or something. If they get out to the perimeter and those Star Destroyers, we'll never see them again."

 "Oh, we'll see them again," Han growled. "Pointed straight back at us. You're rightdisabling as many as we can is our best shot. We're never going to stop all fifty, though."

 "We don't have fifty to stop, at least not yet," Wedge put in. "There are still twelve mole miners that haven't attached themselves to ships."

 "Goodlet's take them out first," Han said. "You got vectors on them?"

 "Feeding your computer now."

 "Okay... okay, here we go." TheFalcon twisted around and headed off in a new direction. "Luke, get on the comm and tell Sluis Control what's happening," he added. "Tell them not to let any ships out of the orbit-dock area."

 "Right." Luke switched channels on the comm; and as he did so, he was suddenly aware of a slight change in sense from theFalcon 's cockpit. "Han? You all right?"

 "Huh? Sure. Why?"

 "I don't know. You seemed to change."

 "I had half a grip on some idea," Han said. "But it's gone now. Come on, make that call. I want you back on the quads when we get there."

 The call to Sluis Control was over well before they reached their target mole miner. "They thank us for the information," Luke reported to the others, "but they say they don't have anything to spare at the moment to help us."

 "Probably don't," Han agreed. "Okay, I see two TIE fighters running escort. Wedge, you and Rogue Five take them out while Luke and I hit the mole miner."

 "Got it," Wedge confirmed. The two X-wings shot past Luke's canopy, flaring apart into intercept mode as the TIE fighters broke formation and came around to meet the attack.

 "Luke, try to blow it apart instead of disintegrating it," Han suggested. "Let's see how many people the Imperials have got stuffed inside."

 "Got it," Luke said. The mole miner was in his sights now. Adjusting his power level down, he fired.

 The truncated cone flared as the metal dead center of the shot boiled away into glowing gas. The rest of the craft seemed intact, though, and Luke was just lining up for a second shot when the hatch at the top abruptly popped open.

 And through the opening, a monstrous, robotlike figure came charging out.

 "What?"

 "It's a spacetrooper," Han snapped back. "A stormtrooper in zero-gee armor. Hang on."

 He spun theFalcon around away from the spacetrooper, but not before there was a flash from a protuberance atop the other's backpack and the hull around Luke slammed with a violent concussion. Han rolled the ship around, blocking Luke's view, as another concussion rocked them.

 And then they were pulling awaypulling away, but with agonizing slowness. Luke swallowed hard, wondering what kind of damage they'd taken.

 "Han, Lukeyou all right?" Wedge's voice called anxiously.

 "Yeah, for now," Han called back. "You get the TIE fighters?"

 "Yes. I think the mole miner's still underway, though."

 "Well, then, blast it," Han said. "Nothing cute; just blow it apart. But watch out for that spacetrooperhe's using miniature proton torpedoes or something. I'm trying to draw him away; I don't know if he'll fall for it."

 "He's not," Wedge said grimly. "He's staying right on top of the mole miner. They're heading for a passenger linerlooks like they'll make it, too."

 Han swore under his breath. "Probably got a few regular stormtrooper buddies still in there. All right, I guess we do this the hard way. Hang on, Lukewe're going to ram him."

 "We'rewhat? "

 Luke's last word was lost in the roar from the engines as Han sent theFalcon flying straight out and then around in a hard turn. The mole miner and spacetrooper came back into Luke's line of sight

 Wedge had been wrong. The spacetrooper wasn't standing by the damaged mole miner; he was, in fact, sidling quickly away from it. The twin protuberances on top of his backpack began flashing again, and a couple of seconds later theFalcon 's hull began ringing with proton torpedo blasts. "Get ready," Han called.

 Luke braced himself, trying not to think about what would happen if one of those torpedoes hit his canopyand trying, too, not to wonder if Han could really ram the spacetrooper without also plowing into the passenger liner directly behind him. Ignoring the proton blasts, theFalcon continued accelerating

 And without warning, Han dropped the ship beneath the spacetrooper's line of fire. "Wedge:go!"

 From beneath Luke's line of sight an X-wing flashed upward, laser cannon blazing.

 And the mole miner shattered into flaming dust.

 "Good shot," Han told him, a note of satisfaction in his voice as he veered underneath the liner, nearly taking theFalcon 's main sensor dish off in the process. "There you go, hotshotenjoy your view of the battle."

 Belatedly, the light dawned. "He was listening in on our channel," Luke said. "You just wanted to decoy him into moving away from the mole miner."

 "You got it," Han said. "I figured he'd tap inImperials always do when they can..."

 He trailed off. "What is it?" Luke asked.

 "I don't know," Han said slowly. "There's something about this whole thing that keeps poking at me, but I can't figure out what it is. Never mind. Our hotshot spacetrooper will keep for nowlet's go hit some more mole miners."

 

 It was just as well, Pellaeon thought, that they were only here to keep the enemy tied up. The Sluissi and their New Republic allies were putting up one terrific fight.

 On his status board, a section of theChimera 's shield schematic went red. "Get that starboard shield back up," he ordered, giving the sky in that direction a quick scan. There were half a dozen warships out there, all of them firing like mad, with a battle station in backstop position behind them. If their sensors showed that theChimera 's starboard shields were starting to go

 "Starboard turbolasers: focus all fire on the Assault Frigate at thirty-two mark forty," Thrawn spoke up calmly. "Concentrate on the starboard side of the ship only."

 TheChimaera gun crews responded with a withering hail of laser fire. The Assault Frigate tried to swerve away; but even as it turned, its entire starboard side seemed to flash with vaporized metal. The weapons from that section, which had been firing nonstop, went abruptly silent.

 "Excellent," Thrawn said. "Starboard tractor crews: lock on and bring it in close. Try to keep it between the damaged shields and the enemy. And be sure to keep its starboard side facing toward us; the port side may still have active weapons and a crew to use them."

 Clearly against its will, the Assault Frigate began to move inward. Pellaeon watched it for a moment, then returned his attention to the overall battle. He had no doubt the tractor crew would do the job right; they'd shown a remarkable increase in efficiency and competence lately. "TIE Squadron Four, keep after that B-wing group," he instructed. "Port ion cannon: keep up the pressure on that command center." He looked at Thrawn. "Any specific orders, Admiral?"

 Thrawn shook his head. "No, the battle seems to be progressing as planned." He turned his glowing eyes on Pellaeon. "What word from Cloak Leader?"

 Pellaeon checked the proper display. "The TIE fighters are still engaging the various escort ships," he reported. "Forty-three of the mole miners have successfully attached to target ships. Of those, thirty-nine are secure and making for the perimeter. Four are still encountering internal resistance, though they anticipate a quick victory."

 "And the other eight?"

 "They've been destroyed," Pellaeon told him. "Including two of those with a spacetrooper aboard. One of those spacetroopers is failing to respond to comm, presumably killed with his craft; the other is still functional. Cloak Leader has ordered him to join the attack on the escort ships."

 "Countermand that," Thrawn said. "I'm quite aware that stormtroopers have infinite confidence in themselves, but that sort of deep-space combat is not what spacetrooper suits were designed for. Have Cloak Leader detail a TIE fighter to bring him out. And also inform him that his wing is to begin pulling back to the perimeter."

 Pellaeon frowned. "You meannow, sir?"

 "Certainly, now." Thrawn nodded toward the viewport. "The first of our new ships will begin arriving within fifteen minutes. As soon as they're all with us, the task force will be withdrawing."

 "But..."

 "The Rebel forces within the perimeter are of no further concern to us, Captain," Thrawn said with quiet satisfaction. "The captured ships are on their way. With or without TIE fighter cover, there's nothing the Rebels can do to stop them."

 

 Han brought theFalcon as close as he could to the Frigate's engines without risking a backwash, feeling the slight multiple dips in ship's power as Luke repeatedly fired the quads. "Anything?" he asked as they came up around the other side.

 "Doesn't look like it," Luke said. "There's just too much armor over the coolant-feeder lines."

 Han glanced along the Frigate's course, fighting back the urge to swear. They were already uncomfortably close to the perimeter battle, and getting closer all the time. "This isn't getting us anywhere. There's got to besome way to take out a capital ship."

 "That's what other capital ships are for," Wedge put in. "But you're rightthis isn't working."

 Han pursed his lips. "Artoo?you still on line back there?" he called.

 The droid's beeping came faintly up the cockpit corridor. "Go through your schematics again," Han ordered. "See if you can find us another weak point."

 Artoo beeped again in acknowledgment. But it wasn't a very optimistic beep. "He's not going to find anything better, Han," Luke said, echoing Han's own private assessment. "I don't think we've got any choice left. I'm going to have to go topside and use my lightsaber on it."

 "That's crazy, and you know it," Han growled. "Without a proper pressure suitand with engine coolant spraying all over you if it works"

 "How about using one of the droids?" Wedge suggested.

 "Neither of them can do it," Luke told him. "Artoo hasn't got the manipulative ability, and I wouldn't trust Threepio with a weapon. Especially not with all the high-acceleration maneuvers we're making."

 "What we need is a remote manipulator arm," Han said. "Something that Luke could use inside while..."

 He broke off. In a flash of inspiration, there it wasthe thing that had been bothering him ever since they'd walked into this crazy battle. "Lando," he called into the intercom."Lando! Get up here."

 "I've got him strapped in," Luke reminded him.

 "Well, goun strap him and get him up here," Han snapped."Now."

 Luke didn't waste time with questions. "Right," he said.

 "What is it?" Wedge asked tensely.

 Han clenched his teeth. "We were there on Nkllon when the Imperials stole these mole miners from Lando," he told the other. "We had to reroute our communications through some jamming."

 "Okay. So?"

 "So why were they jamming us?" Han asked. "To keep us from calling for help? From who? They're not jamming ushere, you notice."

 "I give up," Wedge said, starting to sound a little testy. "Why?"

 "Because they had to. Because"

 "Because most of the mole miners on Nkllon were running on radio remote," came a tired voice from behind him.

 Han turned around, to see Lando easing his way carefully into the cockpit, clearly running at half speed but just as clearly determined to make it. Luke was right behind him, a steadying hand on his elbow. "You heard all that?" Han asked him.

 "Every part that mattered," Lando said, dropping into the copilot's seat. "I could kick myself for not seeing it long ago."

 "Me, too. You remember any of the command codes?"

 "Most of them," Lando said. "What do you need?"

 "We don't have time for anything fancy." Han nodded toward the Frigate, now lying below them. "The mole miners are still attached to the ships. Just start 'em all running."

 Lando looked at him in surprise. "Start themrunning ?" he echoed.

 "You got it," Han confirmed. "All of them are going to be near a bridge or control wingif they can burn through enough equipment and wiring, it should knock out the whole lot of them."

 Lando exhaled noisily, tilting his head sideways in a familiar gesture of reluctant acceptance. "You're the boss," he said, fingers moving over the comm keyboard. "I just hope you know what you're doing. Ready?"

 Han braced himself. "Do it."

 Lando keyed a final section of code... and beneath them, the Frigate twitched.

 Not a big twitch, not at first. But as the seconds passed, it became increasingly clear that something down there was wrong. The main engines flickered a few times and then died, amid short bursts from the auxiliaries. Its drive toward the perimeter fighting faltered, its etheric control surfaces kicking in and then out again, striving to change course in random directions. The big ship floundered almost to a halt.

 And suddenly, the side of the hull directly opposite the mole miner's position erupted in a brilliant burst of flame.

 "It's cut all the way through!" Lando gasped, his tone not sure whether to be proud or dismayed by his handiwork. A TIE fighter, perhaps answering a distress call from the stormtroopers inside, swept directly into the stream of superheated plasma before it could maneuver away. It emerged from the other side, its solar panels blazing with fire, and exploded.

 "It's working," Wedge called, sounding awed. "Lookit's working."

 Han looked up from the Frigate. All around themall throughout the orbit-dock areaships that had been making for deep space were suddenly twisting around like metallic animals in the throes of death.

 All of them with tongues of flame shooting from their sides.

 

 For a long minute Thrawn sat in silence, staring down at his status boards, apparently oblivious to the battle still raging on all around them. Pellaeon held his breath, waiting for the inevitable explosion of injured pride at the unexpected reversal. Wondering what form that explosion would take.

 Abruptly, the Grand Admiral raised his eyes to the viewport. "Have all the remaining Cloak Force TIE fighters returned to our ships, Captain?" he asked calmly.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon told him, still waiting.

 Thrawn nodded. "Then order the task force to begin its withdrawal."

 "Ah... withdrawal?" Pellaeon asked cautiously. It was not exactly the order he'd been anticipating.

 Thrawn looked at him, a faint smile on his face. "You were expecting, perhaps, that I'd order an all-out attack?" he asked. "That I would seek to cover our defeat in a frenzy of false and futile heroics?"

 "Of course not," Pellaeon protested.

 But he knew down deep that the other knew the truth. Thrawn's smile remained, but was suddenly cold. "We haven't been defeated, Captain," he said quietly. "Merely slowed down a bit. We have Wayland, and we have the treasures of the Emperor's storehouse. Sluis Van was to be merely a preliminary to the campaign, not the campaign itself. As long as we have Mount Tantiss, our ultimate victory is still assured."

 He looked out the viewport, a thoughtful expression on his face. "We've lost this particular prize, Captain. But that's all we've lost. I will not waste ships and men trying to change that which cannot be changed. There will be many more opportunities to obtain the ships we need. Carry out your orders."

 "Yes, Admiral," Pellaeon said, turning back to his status board, a surge of relief washing through him. So there would not be an explosion, after all... and with a twinge of guilt, he realized that he should have known better from the start. Thrawn was not merely a soldier, like so many others Pellaeon had served with. He was, instead, a true warrior, with his eye set on the final goal and not on his own personal glory.

 Taking one last look out the viewport, Pellaeon issued the order to retreat. And wondered, once again, what the Battle of Endor would have been like if Thrawn had been in command.

 

 Chapter 32

 It took a while longer after the Imperial fleet pulled out for the battle to be officially over. But with the Star Destroyers gone, the outcome was never in doubt.

 The regular stormtroopers were the easiest. Most of them were dead already, killed when Lando's activation of the mole miners had ruptured the airseals of their stolen ships and left them open to vacuum, and the rest were taken without much trouble. The eight remaining spacetroopers, whose zero-gee suits had allowed them to keep fighting after their ships were disabled, were another story entirely. Ignoring all calls to surrender, they fanned out through the shipyards, clearly intent on causing as much damage as they could before the inevitable. Six were hunted down and destroyed; the other two eventually self-destructed, one managing to cripple a Corvette in the process.

 He left behind him a shipyard and orbit-dock facility in an uproar... and a great number of severely damaged major ships.

 "Not exactly what you'd call a resounding victory," Captain Afyon grunted, surveying what was left of theLarkhess 's bridge through a pressure bulkhead viewport as he gingerly adjusted a battle dressing that had been applied to his forehead. "Going to take a couple months' work just to rewire all the control circuits."

 "Would you rather the Imperials have gotten it whole?" Han demanded from behind him, trying to ignore his own mixed feelings about this whole thing. Yes, it had worked... but at what cost?

 "Not at all," Afyon replied calmly. "You did what you had toand I'd say that even if my own neck hadn't been on the line. I'm just saying what others will say: that destroying all these ships in order to save them was not exactly the optimal solution."

 Han threw a look at Luke. "You sound like Councilor Fey'lya," he accused Afyon.

 The other nodded. "Exactly."

 "Well, fortunately, Fey'lya's only one voice," Luke offered.

 "Yeah, but it's a loud one," Han said sourly.

 "And one that a lot of people are starting to listen to," Wedge added. "Including important military people."

 "He'll find some way to parlay this incident into his own political gain," Afyon rumbled. "You just watch him."

 Han's rejoinder was interrupted by a trilling from the wall intercom. Afyon stepped over and tapped the switch. "Afyon here," he said.

 "Sluis Control communications," a voice replied. "We have an incoming call from Coruscant for Captain Solo. Is he with you?"

 "Right here," Han called, stepping over to the speaker. "Go ahead."

 There was a slight pause; and then a familiar and sorely missed voice came on. "Han? It's Leia."

 "Leia!" Han said, feeling a delighted and probably slightly foolish-looking grin spread across his face. A second later, though "Wait a minute. What are you doing back on Coruscant?"

 "I think I've taken care of our other problem," she said. Her voice, he noticed for the first time, sounded tense and more than a little ragged. "At least for the moment."

 Han threw a frown across the room at Luke. "Youthink ?"

 "Look, that's not important right now," she insisted. "What's important is that you get back here right away."

 Something cold and hard settled into Han's stomach. For Leia to be this upset... "What's wrong?"

 He heard her take a deep breath. "Admiral Ackbar has been arrested and removed from command. On charges of treason."

 The room abruptly filled with a brittle silence. Han looked in turn at Luke, at Afyon, at Wedge. But there didn't seem to be anything to say. "I'll be there as soon as I can," he told Leia. "Luke's here, tooyou want me to bring him?"

 "Yes, if he can manage it," she said. "Ackbar's going to need all the friends he can get."

 "Okay," Han said. "Call me in theFalcon if there's any more news. We're heading over there right now."

 "I'll see you soon. I love you, Han."

 "Me, too."

 He broke the connection, turned back to the others. "Well," he said, to no one in particular. "There goes the hammer. You coming, Luke?"

 Luke looked at Wedge. "Have your people had a chance to do anything with my X-wing yet?"

 "Not yet," Wedge said, shaking his head. "But it's just been officially bumped to the top of the priority list. We'll have it ready to fly in two hours. Even if I have to take the motivators out of my own ship to do it."

 Luke nodded and looked back at Han. "I'll fly into Coruscant on my own, then," he said. "Let me just come with you and get Artoo off theFalcon ."

 "Right. Come on."

 "Good luck," Afyon called softly after them.

 And yes, Han thought as they hurried down the corridor toward the hatchway where theFalcon was docked; the hammer was indeed coming down. If Fey'lya and his faction pushed too hard and too fastand knowing Fey'lya, he would almost certainly push too hard and too fast

 "We could be on the edge of a civil war here," Luke murmured his thought back at him.

 "Yeah, well, we're not going to let that happen," Han told him with confidence he didn't feel. "We haven't gone through a war and back just to watch some overambitious Bothan wreck it."

 "How are we going to stop him?"

 Han grimaced. "We'll think of something."

 

 To Be Continued...

 

 





==================================
  ABC Amber LIT Converter v2.02
==================================

 Timothy Zahn

 Dark Force Rising

 

 Book 1 of the "Thrawn" trilogy

 CHAPTER
1

 Directly ahead, the star was a marble-sized yellow orange ball, its intensity moderated by its distance and by the viewports' automatic sunscreens. Surrounding it and the ship itself were the stars, a spattering of blazing white pinpricks in the deep blackness of space. Directly beneath the ship, in the western part of the Great Northern Forest of the planet Myrkr, dawn was approaching.

 The last dawn that some in that forest would ever see.

 Standing at one of the side bridge viewports of the Imperial Star DestroyerChimaera , Captain Pellaeon watched as the fuzzy terminator line crept toward the target zone on the planet below. Ten minutes ago, the ground forces surrounding the target had reported themselves ready; theChimaera itself had been holding blockade position for nearly an hour. All that was missing now was the order to attack.

 Slowly, feeling almost furtive about it, Pellaeon turned his head a couple of centimeters to the side. Behind him and to his right, Grand Admiral Thrawn was seated at his command station, his blue-skinned face expressionless, his glowing red eyes focused on the bank of status readouts wrapped around his chair. He hadn't spoken or moved from that position since the last of the ground forces had reported in, and Pellaeon could tell the bridge crew was beginning to get restless.

 For his own part, Pellaeon had long since stopped trying to second-guess Thrawn's actions. The fact that the late Emperor had seen fit to make Thrawn one of his twelve Grand Admirals was evidence of his own confidence in the manall the more so given Thrawn's not entirely-human heritage and the Emperor's well-known prejudices in sub matters. Moreover, in the year since Thrawn had taken command of theChimaera and had begun the task of rebuilding the Imperial Fleet, Pellaeon had seen the Grand Admiral's military genius demonstrated time and again. Whatever his reason for holding off the attack, Pellaeon knew it was a good one.

 As slowly as he'd turned away, he turned back to the viewport. But his movements had apparently not gone unnoticed. "A question, Captain?" Thrawn's smoothly modulated voice cut through the low hum of bridge conversation.

 "No, sir," Pellaeon assured him, turning again to face his superior.

 For a moment those glowing eyes studied him, and Pellaeon unconsciously braced himself for a reprimand, or worse. But Thrawn, as Pellaeon still had a tendency to forget, did not have the legendary and lethal temper that had been the hallmark of the Lord Darth Vader.

 "You're perhaps wondering why we haven't yet attacked?" the Grand Admiral suggested in that same courteous tone.

 "Yes, sir, I was," Pellaeon admitted. "All our forces appear to be in position.

 "Our military forces are, yes," Thrawn agreed. "But not the observers I sent into Hyllyard City."

 Pellaeon blinked. "Hyllyard City?"

 "Yes. I find it unlikely that a man of Talon Karrde's cunning would set up a base in the middle of a forest without also setting up security contacts with others outside the immediate area. Hyllyard City is too far from Karrde's base for anyone there to directly witness our attack; hence, any sudden flurries of activity in the city will imply the existence of a more subtle line of communication. From that we'll be able to identify Karrde's contacts and put them under long-term surveillance. Eventually, they'll lead us to him."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, feeling a frown crease his forehead. "Then you're not expecting to take any of Karrde's own people alive.

 The Grand Admiral's smile turned brittle. "On the contrary. I fully expect our forces to find an empty and abandoned base."

 Pellaeon threw a glance out the viewport at the partly lit planet below. "In that case, sir why are we attacking it?"

 "Three reasons, Captain. First, even men like Talon Karrde occasionally make mistakes. It could well be that in the rush to evacuate his base he left some crucial bit of information behind. Second, as I've already mentioned, an attack on the base may lead us to his contacts in Hyllyard City. And third, it provides our ground forces with some badly needed field experience."

 The glowing eyes bored into Pellaeon's face. "Never forget, Captain, that our goal is no longer merely the pitiful rear-guard harassment of the past five years. With Mount Tantiss and our late Emperor's collection of Spaarti Cylinders in our hands, the initiative is once again ours. Very soon now we'll begin the process of taking planets back from the Rebellion; and for that we'll need an army every bit as well trained as the officers and crew of the Fleet."

 "Understood, Admiral," Pellaeon said.

 "Good." Thrawn lowered his gaze to his displays. "It's time. Signal General Covell that he may begin."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, leaving the viewport and returning to his station. He gave the readouts a quick check and tapped his comm switch, peripherally aware as he did so that Thrawn had likewise activated his own comm. Some private message to his spies in Hyllyard City? "This is theChimaera ," Pellaeon said. "Launch the attack."

 

 "Acknowledged,Chimaera ," General Covell said into his helmet comlink, careful to keep the quiet scorn in his gut from getting through to his voice. It was typicaland disgustingly predictable. You scrambled around like mad hellions, got your troops and vehicles on the ground and set up and then you stood around waiting for those strutting Fleet people in their spotless uniforms and nice clean ships to finish sipping their tea and finally get around to letting you loose.

 Well, get yourselves on the table,he thought sardonically in the direction of the Star Destroyer overhead. Because whether Grand Admiral Thrawn was interested in real results or just a good rousing show, he was going to get his money's worth. Reaching to the board in front of him, he keyed for local command frequency. "General Covell to all units: we've got the light. Let's go."

 The acknowledgments came in; and with a shiver from the steel deck beneath him, the huge AT-AT walker was off lumbering its deceptively awkward-looking way through the forest toward the encampment a kilometer away. Ahead of the AT-AT, occasionally visible through the armored transparisteel viewport, a pair of AT-ST scout walkers ran in twin-point formation, tracking along the AT-AT's path and watching for enemy positions or booby traps.

 Not that such futile gestures would do Karrde any good. Covell had directed literally hundreds of assault campaigns in his years of Imperial service, and he knew full well the awesome capabilities of the fighting machines under his command.

 Beneath the viewport, the holographic tactical display was lit up like a decorative disk, the winking red, white, and green lights showing the positions of Covell's circle of AT-ATs, AT-STs, and hoverscout attack vehicles, all closing on Karrde's encampment in good order.

 Good, but not perfect. The north-flank AT-AT and its support vehicles were lagging noticeably behind the rest of the armored noose. "Unit Two, bring it up," he said into his comlink.

 "Trying, sir," the voice came back, tinny and distant through the strange dampening effects of Myrkr's metalrich flora. "We're encountering some thick vine clusters that are slowing down our scout walkers."

 "Is it bothering your AT-AT any?"

 "No, sir, but I wanted to keep the flank together"

 "Pattern coherence is a fine goal during academy maneuvers, Major," Covell cut him off. "But not at the expense of an overall battle plan. If the AT-STs can't keep up, leave them behind."

 "Yes, sir."

 Covell broke the connection with a snort. The Grand Admiral was right about one thing, at least: his troops were going to need a lot more battle seasoning before they would be up to real Imperial standards. Still, the raw material was there. Even as he watched, the north flank reformed itself, with the hoverscouts spreading forward to take up the AT-STs' former point positions while the lagging AT-STs themselves fell back into rear-guard deployment.

 The energy sensor beeped a proximity warning: they were coming up on the encampment. "Status?" he asked his crew.

 "All weapons charged and ready," the gunner reported, his eyes on the targeting displays.

 "No indications of resistance, active or passive," the driver added.

 "Stay alert," Covell ordered keying for command frequency again. "All units: move in."

 And with a final crash of mangled vegetation, the AT-AT broke through into the clearing.

 It was an impressive sight. From all four sides of the open area, in nearly perfect parade-ground unison, the other three AT-ATs appeared from the forest cover in the predawn gloom, the AT-STs and hoverscouts clustered around their feet quickly fanning out on all sides to encircle the darkened buildings.

 Covell gave the sensors a quick but complete check. Two energy sources were still functioning, one in the central building, the other in one of the outer barracks-style structures. There was no evidence of operating sensors, or of weapons or energy fields. The life-form analyzer ran through its complicated algorithms and concluded that the outer buildings were devoid of life.

 The large main building, on the other hand 

 "I'm getting approximately twenty life-form readings from the main building, General," the number four AT-AT commander reported. "All in the central section."

 "They don't register as human, though," Covell's driver murmured.

 "Maybe they're being shielded," Covell grunted, looking out the viewport. Still no movement from the encampment. "Let's find out. Assault squads: go."

 The hoverscouts popped their aft hatchways, and from each came a squad of eight soldiers, laser rifles held tautly across battle-armored chests as they dropped to the ground. Half of each squad took up backstop position, their rifles trained on the encampment from the partial cover of their hoverscout, while the other half sprinted across the open ground to the outer line of buildings and sheds. There, they assumed covering positions, allowing their comrades in the rear to similarly advance. It was a centuries-old military tactic, executed with the kind of squeamish determination that Covell would have expected of green troops. Still, the raw material was definitely there.

 The soldiers continued their leap-frog approach to the main building, with small groups breaking off the main encirclement to check out each of the outer structures as they passed. The point men reached the central buildinga brilliant flash lit up the forest as they blasted down the doora slightly confused scramble as the rest of the troops piled through.

 And then, silence.

 For a handful of minutes the silence continued, punctuated only by occasional short commands from the troop commanders. Covell listened, watching the sensors and finally the report came through. "General Covell, this is Lieutenant Barse. We've secured the target zone, sir. There's no one here."

 Covell nodded. "Very good, Lieutenant. How does it look?"

 "Like they pulled out in a hurry, sir," the other said. "They left a fair amount of stuff behind, but it all looks pretty much like junk."

 "That'll be for the scanning crew to decide," Covell told him.

 "Any indication of booby traps or other unpleasant surprises?"

 "None at all, sir. Ohand those life-forms we picked up are nothing but these long furry animals living on the tree growing up through the center of the roof."

 Covell nodded again. Ysalamiri, he believed they were called. Thrawn had been making a big deal about the stupid creatures for a couple of months now, though what use they could possibly be to the war effort he couldn't guess. Eventually, he supposed, the Fleet people would get around to letting him in on the big secret. "Set up a defensive honeycomb," he ordered the lieutenant. "Signal the scanning crew when you're ready. And get comfortable. The Grand Admiral wants this place taken apart, and that's exactly what we're going to do."

 

 "Very good, General," the voice said, almost too faint to hear despite the heavy amplification and computer scrubbing. "Proceed with the dismantling."

 Seated at theWild Karrde 's helm, Mara Jade half turned to face the man standing behind her. "I suppose that's it, then," she said.

 For a moment Talon Karrde didn't seem to hear her. He just stood there, gazing through the viewport at the distant planet, a tiny bluish-white crescent shape visible around the jagged edge of the sun-skimmer asteroid the Wild Karr was snuggled up against. Mara was just about to repeat the comment when he stirred. "Yes," he said, that calm voice showing no hint of the emotion he was obviously feeling. "I suppose it is."

 Mara exchanged glances with Aves, at the copilot station, then looked back up at Karrde. "Shouldn't we be going, then?" she prompted.

 Karrde took a deep breath and as she watched him, Mara caught in his expression a glimmer of what the Myrkr base had meant to him. More than just a base, it had been his home.

 With an effort, she suppressed the thought. So Karrde had lost his home. Big deal. She'd lost far more than that in her lifetime and had survived Just fine. He'd get over it.

 "I asked if we should get going."

 "I heard you," Karrde said, the flicker of emotion vanishing again into that slightly sardonic facade of his. "I think perhaps we ought to wait a little longer. See if we left anything behind that might point in the direction of our Rishi base."

 Mara looked at Aves again. "We were pretty thorough," Aves said. "I don't think there was any mention of Rishi anywhere except the main computer, and that left with the first group out."

 "I agree," Karrde said. "Are you willing to stake your life on that assessment?"

 Aves's lip twitched. "Not really."

 "Nor am I. So we wait."

 "What if they spot us?" Mara persisted. "Skulking behind asteroids is the oldest trick on the list."

 "They won't spot us." Karrde was quietly positive. "Actually, I doubt the possibility will even occur to them. The average man running from the likes of Grand Admiral Thrawn is unlikely to stop running until he's a good deal farther away than this."

 Are you willing to stake your life on that assessment?Mara thought sourly. But she kept the retort to herself. He was probably right; and anyway, if theChimaera or any of its TIE fighters started towardWild Karrde , they would have no trouble punching the engines up to power and going to lightspeed well ahead of the attack.

 The logic and tactics seemed clean. But still, Mara could feel something nagging at the back of her mind. Something that didn't feel good about all this.

 Gritting her teeth, she adjusted the ship's sensors to their highest sensitivity and checked once more that the engine prestart sequence was keyed in and ready. And then settled in to wait.

 

 The scanning crew was fast, efficient, and thorough; and it took them just over thirty minutes to come up completely dry.

 "Well, so much for that." Pellaeon grimaced as he watched the negative reports scroll up his display. A good practice session for the ground forces, perhaps, but otherwise the whole exercise seemed to have been pretty useless. "Unless your observers have picked up any reactions in Hyllyard City," he added, turning to face Thrawn.

 The Grand Admiral's glowing red eyes were on his displays. "There was a small twitch, as a matter of fact," he said. "Cut off almost before it began, but I think the implications are clear."

 Well, that was something, anyway. "Yes, sir. Shall I have Surveillance begin equipping a long-term ground team?"

 "Patience, Captain," Thrawn said. "It may not be necessary, after all. Key for a midrange scan, and tell me what you see.

 Pellaeon swiveled back to his command board and tapped for the appropriate readout. There was Myrkr itself of course, and the standard TIE fighter defense cloud ranged around theChimaera . The only other object anywhere within midrange distance"You mean that little asteroid out there?"

 "That's the one," Thrawn nodded. "Nothing remarkable about it, is there? No, don't do a sensor focus," he added, almost before the thought of doing one had even occurred to Pellaeon. "We wouldn't want to prematurely flush our quarry, would we?"

 "Our quarry?" Pellaeon repeated, frowning at the sensor data again. The routine sensor scans that had been done of the asteroid three hours earlier had come up negative, and nothing could have sneaked up on it since then without being detected. "With all due respect, sir, I don't see any indication that anything's out there.

 "I don't either," Thrawn agreed. "But it's the only sizable cover available for nearly ten million kilometers around Myrkr. There's really no other place for Karrde to watch our operation from."

 Pellaeon pursed his lips. "Your permission, Admiral, but I doubt Karrde is foolish enough to just sit around waiting for us to arive.

 The glowing red eyes narrowed, just a bit. "You forget, Captain," he said softly, "that I've met the man. More important, I've seen the sort of artwork he collects." He turned back to his displays. "No; he's out there. I'm sure of it. Talon Karrde is not merely a smuggler, you see. Perhaps not even primarily a smuggler. His real love is not goods or money but information. More than anything else in the galaxy, he craves knowledgeand the knowledge of what we have or have not found here is too valuable a gem for him to pass up."

 Pellaeon studied the Grand Admiral's profile. It was, in his opinion, a pritty tenuous leap of logic. But on the other hand, he'd seen too many similar leaps borne out not to take this one seriously. "Shall I order a TIE fighter squad to investigate, sir?"

 "As I said, Captain, patience," Thrawn said. "Even in sensor stealth mode with all engines shut down, he'll have made sure he can power up and escape before any attack force could reach him." He smiled at Pellaeon. "Or rather, any attack force from theChimaera ."

 A stray memory clicked: Thrawn, reaching for his comm just as Pellaeon was giving the ground forces the order to attack. "You sent a message to the rest of the fleet," he said. "Timing it against my attack order to mask the transmission.

 Thrawn's blue-black eyebrows lifted a fraction. "Very good, Captain. Very good, indeed."

 Pellaeon felt a touch of warmth on his cheeks. The Grand Admiral's compliments were few and far between. "Thank you, sir."

 Thrawn nodded. "More precisely, my message was to a single ship, theConstrainer . It will arrive in approximately ten minutes. At which point"his eyes glittered"we'll see just how accurate my reading of Karrde has been."

 

 Over theWild Karrde 's bridge speakers, the reports from the scanning crew were beginning to taper off. "Doesn't sound like they've found anything," Aves commented.

 "Like you said, we were thorough," Mara reminded him, hardly hearing her own words. The nameless thing nagging at the back of her mind seemed to be getting stronger. "Can we get out of here now?" she asked, turning to look at Karrde.

 He frowned down at her. "Try to relax, Mara. They can't possibly know we're here. There's been no sensorfocus probe of the asteroid, and without one there's no way for them to detect this ship."

 "Unless a Star Destroyer's sensors are better than you think," Mara retorted.

 "We know all about their sensors," Aves soothed. "Ease up, Mara, Karrde knows what he's doing. TheWild Karrde has probably the tightest sensor stealth mode this side of"

 He broke off as the bridge door opened behind them; and Mara turned just as Karrde's two pet vornskrs bounded into the room.

 Dragging, very literally, their handler behind them.

 "What are you doing here, Chin?" Karrde asked.

 "Sorry, Capt'," Chin puffed, digging his heels into the deck and leaning back against the taut leashes. The effort was only partially successful; the predators were still pulling him slowly forward. "I couldn't stop them. I thought maybe, they wanted to see you, hee?"

 "What's the matter with you two, anyway?" Karrde chided the animals, squatting down in front of them. "Don't you know we're busy?"

 The vornskrs didn't look at him. Didn't even seem to notice his presence, for that matter. They continued staring straight ahead as if he wasn't even there.

 Staring directly at Mara.

 "Hey," Karrde said, reaching over to slap one of the animals lightly across the muzzle. "I'm talking to you, Sturm. What's gotten into you, anyway?" He glanced along their unblinking line of sight

 Paused for a second and longer look. "Are you doing something, Mara?"

 Mara shook her head, a cold shiver tingling up her back. She'd seen that look before, on many of the wild vornskrs she'd run into during that long three-day trek through the Myrkr's forest with Luke Skywalker.

 Except that those vornskr stares hadn't been directed at her. They'd been reserved instead for Skywalker. Usually just before they attacked him.

 "That's Mara, Sturm," Karrde told the animal, speaking to it as he might a child. "Mara. Come on, nowyou saw her all the time back home."

 Slowly, almost reluctantly, Sturm stopped his forward pull and turned his attention to his master. "Mara," Karrde repeated, looking th'e vornskr firmly in the eye. "A friend. You hear that, Drang?" he added, reaching over to grip the other vornskr's muzzle. "She's a friend. Understand?"

 Drang seemed to consider that. Then, as reluctantly as Sturm had, he lowered his head and stopped pulling. "That's better," Karrde said, scratching both voruslo's briefly behind their ears and standing up again. "Better take them back down, Chin. Maybe walk them around the main holdgive them some exercise.

 "If I can find a clear track through all the stuff in there, hee?" Chin grunted, twitching back on the leashes. "Come on, littles  we go now."

 With only a slight hesitation the two vornskrs allowed him to take them off the bridge. Karrde watched as the door shut behind them. "I wonder what that was all about," he said, giving Mara a thoughtful look.

 "I don't know," she told him, hearing the tightness in her voice.

 With the temporary distraction now gone, the strange dread she'd been feeling was back again in full force. She swiveled back to her board, half expecting to see a squadron of TIE fighters bearing down on them.

 But there was nothing. Only theChimaera , still sitting harmlessly out there in orbit around Myrkr. No threat any of theWild Karrde 's instruments could detect. But the tingling was getting stronger and stronger

 And suddenly she could sit still no longer. Reaching out to the control board, she keyed for engine prestart.

 "Mara!" Aves yelped, jumping in his seat as if he'd been stung. "What in?"

 "They're coming," Mara snarled back, hearing the strain of a half dozen tangled emotions in her voice. The die was irrevocably casther activation of theWild Karrde 's engines would have set sensors screaming all over theChimaera . Now there was nowhere to go but out.

 She looked up at Karrde, suddenly afraid of what his expression might be saying. But he was just standing there looking down at her, a slightly quizzical frown on his face. "They don't appear to be coming," he pointed out mildly.

 She shook her head, feeling the pleading in her eyes. "You have to believe me," she said, uncomfortably aware that she didn't really believe it herself. "They're getting ready to attack."

 "I believe you," he said soothingly. Or perhaps he, too, recognized that there weren't any other choices left. "Aves: lightspeed calculation. Take the easiest course setting that's not anywhere toward Rishi; we'll stop and reset later."

 "Karrde"

 "Mara is second in command," Karrde cut him off. "As such, she has the right and the duty to make important decisions.

 "Yeah, but" Aves stopped, the last word coming out pinched as he strangled it off. "Yeah," he said between clenched teeth. Throwing a glower at Mara, he turned to the nav computer and got to work.

 "You might as well get us moving, Mara," Karrde continued, stepping over to the vacant communications chair and sitting down. "Keep the asteroid between us and theChimaera as long as you can.

 "Yes, sir," Mara said. Her tangle of emotions was starting to dissolve now, leaving a mixture of anger and profound embarrassment in its wake. She'd done it again. Listened to her inner feelingstried to do things she knew full well she couldn't doand in the process had once again wound up clutching the sharp end of the bayonet.

 And it was probably the last she'd hear of being Karrde's second in command, too. Command unity in front of Aves was one thing, but once they were out of here and he could get her alone there was going to be hell to pay. She'd be lucky if he didn't bounce her out of his organization altogether. Jabbing viciously at her board, she swung theWild Karrde around, turning its nose away from the asteroid and starting to drive toward deep space

 And with a flicker of pseudomotion, something big shot in from lightspeed, dropping neatly into normal space not twenty kilometers away.

 An Imperial Interdictor Cruiser.

 Aves yelped a startled-sounding curse. "We got company," he barked.

 "I see it," Karrde said. As cool as ever but Mara could hear the tinge of surprise in his voice, too. "What's our time to lightspeed?"

 "It'll be another minute," Aves said tautly. "There's a lot of junk in the outer system for the computer to work through."

 "We have a race, then," Karrde said. "Mara?"

 "Up to point seven three," she said, nursing as much power as she could out of the still-sluggish engines. He was right; it was indeed going to be a race. With their four huge gravity-wave generators capable of simulating planet-sized masses, Interdictor Cruisers were the Empire's weapon of choice for trapping an enemy ship in normal space while TIE fighters pounded it to rubble. But coming in fresh out of lightspeed itself, the Interdictor would need another minute before it could power up those generators. If she could get theWild Karrde out of range by then

 "More visitors," Aves announced. "A couple, squadrons of TIE fighters coming from theChimaera .

 "We're up to point eight six power," Mara reported. "We'll be ready for lightspeed as soon as the nav computer gives me a course.

 "Interdictor status?"

 "Grav generators are powering up," Aves said. On Mara's tactical display a ghostly cone appeared, showing the area where the lightspeed-dampening field would soon exist She changed course slightly, aiming for the nearest edge, and risked a glance at the nav computer display. Almost ready. The hazy grav cone was rapidly becoming more substantial

 The computer scope pinged. Mara wrapped her hand around the three hyperspace control levers at the front of the control board and gently pulled them toward her. TheWild Karrde shuddered slightly, and for a second it seemed that the Interdictor had won their deadly race. Then, abruptly, the stars outside burst into starlines.

 They'd made it.

 Aves heaved a sigh of relief as the starlines faded into the mottled sky of hyperspace. "Talk about slicing the mynock close to the hull. How do you suppose they tumbled that we were out there, anyway?"

 "No idea," Karrde said, his voice cool. "Mara?"

 "I don't know, either." Mara kept her eyes on her displays, not daring to look at either of them. "Thrawn may have just been playing a hunch. He does that sometimes."

 "Lucky for us he's not the only one who gets hunches," Aves offered, his voice sounding a little strange. "Nice going, Mara. Sorry I jumped on you."

 "Yes," Karrde seconded. "A very good job indeed."

 "Thanks," Mara muttered, keeping her eyes on her control board and blinking back the tears that had suddenly come to her eyes. So it was back. She'd hoped fervently that her locating of Skywalker's X-wing out in deep space had been an isolated event. A fluke, more his doing than hers.

 But no. It was all coming back, as it had so many times before in the past five years. The hunches and sensory flickers, the urges and the compulsions.

 Which meant that, very soon now, the dreams would probably be starting again, too.

 Angrily, she swiped at her eyes, and with an effort unclenched her jaw. It was a familiar enough pattern but this time things were going to be different. Always before there'd been nothing she could do about the voices and urges except to suffer through the cycle. To suffer, and to be ready to break out of whatever niche she'd managed to carve for herself when she finally betrayed herself to those around her.

 But she wasn't a serving girl in a Phorliss cantina this time, or a come-up deflector for a swoop gang on Caprioril, or even a hyperdrive mechanic stuck in the backwater of the Ison Corridor. She was second in command to the most powerful smuggler in the galaxy, with the kind of resources and mobility she hadn't had since the death of the Emperor.

 The kind of resources that would let her find Luke Skywalker again. And kill him.

 Maybe then the voices would stop.

 

 For a long minute Thrawn stood at the bridge viewport, looking out at the distant asteroid and the now superfluous Interdictor Cruiser near it. It was, Pellaeon thought uneasily, almost the identical posture the Grand Admiral had assumed when Luke Skywalker had so recently escaped a similar trap. Holding his breath, Pellaeon stared at Thrawn's back, wondering if another of theChimaera 's crewers was about to be executed for this failure.

 Thrawn turned around. "Interesting," he said, his voice conversational. "Did you note the sequence of events, Captain?"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said cautiously. "The target was already powering up before theConstrainer arrived."

 "Yes," Thrawn nodded. "And it implies one of three things. Either Karrde was about to leave anyway, or else he panicked for some reason" The red eyes glittered. "Or else he was somehow warned off."

 Pellaeon felt his back stiffen. "I hope you're not suggesting, sir, that one of our people tipped him."

 "No, of course not." Thrawn's lip twitched slightly. "Loyalties of your crewers aside, no one on theChimaera knew theConstrainer was on its way; and no one on theConstrainer could have sent any messages here without our detecting them." He stepped over to his command station and sat down, a thoughtful look on his face. "An interesting puzzle, Captain. One I'll have to give some thought to. In the meantime, we have more pressing matters. The task of acquiring new warships, for one. Have there been any recent responses to our invitation?"

 "Nothing particularly interesting, Admiral," Pellaeon said, pulling up the comm log and giving it a quick scan to refresh his memory. "Eight of the fifteen groups I contacted have expressed interest, though none were willing to commit themselves to anything specific. We're still waiting on the others."

 Thrawn nodded. "We'll give them a few weeks. If there've been no results after that time, we'll make the invitation a bit more compulsory."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon hesitated. "There's also been another communication from Jomark."

 Thrawn turned his glowing eyes on Pellaeon. "I would very much appreciate it, Captain," he said, biting off each word, "if you would try to make it clear to our exalted Jedi Master C'baoth that if he persists in these communications he's going to subvert the whole purpose of putting him on Jomark in the first place. If the Rebels get even a hint of any connection between us, he can forget about Skywalker ever showing up there."

 "Ihave explained it to him, sir," Pellaeon grimaced. "Numerous times. His reply is always that Skywalker is going to show up. And then he demands to know when you're going to get around to delivering Skywalker's sister to him."

 For a long moment Thrawn said nothing. "I suppose there'll be no shutting him up until he gets what he wants," he said at last. "Nor of getting any uncomplaining work out of him, either."

 "Yes, he was grumbling about the attack coordination you've been having him do," Pellaeon nodded. "He's warned me several times that he can't predict exactly when Skywalker will arrive on Jomark."

 "And implied that a horrible retribution would fall upon us if he's not there when that happens," Thrawn growled. "Yes, I know the routine well. And I'm getting rather tired of it." He took a deep breath, let it out slowly. "Very well, Captain. The next time C'baoth calls, you may inform him that the Taanab operation will be his last for the immediate future. Skywalker isn't likely to make it to Jomark for at least two more weeksthe little pot of political confusion we've stirred up in the Rebellion high command should occupy him at least that long. As to Organa Solo and her unborn Jediyou may also inform him that from now on I'll be taking a personal hand in that matter."

 Pellaeon threw a quick glance over his shoulder, to where the Grand Admiral's bodyguard, Rukh, stood silently near the aft bridge door. "Does that mean you'll be taking the Noghri off the job, sir?" he asked quietly.

 "Do you have a problem with that, Captain?"

 "No, sir. May I respectfully remind the Grand Admiral, though, that the Noghri have never liked leaving a mission uncompleted."

 "The Noghri are servants of the Empire," Thrawn countered coldly. "More to the point, they're loyal to me personally. They will do as they're told." He paused. "However, I'll take your concerns under advisement. At any rate, our task here at Myrkr is completed. Order General Covell to bring his force back up."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, signalling the communications officer to relay the message.

 "I'll want the general's report on file in three hours," Thrawn continued. "Twelve hours after that I want his recommendations as to the three best infantry troopers and two best mechanized operators in the assault. Those five men will be transferred to the Mount Tantiss operation and given immediate transport to Wayland."

 "Understood," Pellaeon nodded, dutifully logging the orders in Covell's file. Such recommendations had been part of standard Imperial procedure for several weeks now, ever since the Mount Tantiss operation had begun in earnest. But Thrawn nevertheless still periodically went out of his way to mention it to his officers. Perhaps as a not-so-subtle reminder of how vitally important those recommendations were to the Grand Admiral's sweeping plan to crush the Rebellion.

 Thrawn looked out the viewport again at the planet beneath them.

 "And while we await the general's return, you'll contact Surveillance regarding that long-term team for Hyllyard City." He smiled. "It's a very large galaxy, Captain, but even a man like Talon Karrde can run only so long. Eventually, he'll have to come to rest."

 

 It wasn't really deserving of its name, the High Castle of Jomark. Not in Jonius C'baoth's estimation, anyway. Short and dirty, its stonework ill-fitting in places and as alien as the long-gone race that had built it, it squatted uneasily between two of the larger crags on what was left of an ancient volcanic cone. Still, with the rest of the rim circling around in the distance, and the brilliant blue waters of Ring Lake four hundred meters almost straight down beneath him, C'baoth could allow that the natives had at least found some good scenery to build their castle on. Their castle, or temple, or whatever. It had been a good place for a Jedi Master to move into, if only because the colonists seemed to hold the place in awe. Then too, the dark island that filled the center of the crater and gave the lake its ring shape provided a suitably hidden landing site for Thrawn's annoyingly endless stream of shuttles.

 But it was neither the scenery, nor the power, nor even the Empire that held C'baoth's thoughts as he stood on the castle terrace and gazed down into Ring Lake. It was, instead, the strange flicker he'd just felt in the Force.

 He'd felt it before, this flicker. Or at least he thought he had.

 Threads to the past were always so hard to follow, so easily lost in the mists and the hurryings of the present. Even of his own past he had only glimpses of memory, scenes as if from a history record. He rather thought he remembered someone trying to explain the reasons to him once, but the explanation was long gone in the darkness of the past.

 It didn't matter anyway. Memory wasn't important; concentration wasn't important; his own past wasn't important. He could call upon the Force when he wanted to, and that was what was important. As long as he could do that, no one could ever hurt him or take away what he had.

 Except that Grand Admiral Thrawn had already taken it away. Hadn't he?

 C'baoth looked around the terrace. Yes. Yes; this wasn't the home and city and world he'd chosen to mold and command as his own. This wasn't Wayland, which he'd wrested from the Dark Jedi whom the Emperor had set to guard his Mount Tantiss storehouse. This was Jomark, where he was waiting for someone.

 He stroked his fingers through his long white beard, forcing himself to concentrate. He was waiting for Luke Skywalkerthat was it. Luke Skywalker was going to come to him, and Luke Skywalker's sister and her as-yet unborn twins, and he would turn all of them into his followers. Grand Admiral Thrawn had promised them to him, in return for his help to the Empire.

 He winced at the thought. It was hard, this help that Grand Admiral Thrawn wanted. He had to concentrate hard to do what they wanted; to hold his thoughts and feelings closely in line, and for long periods at a time. On Wayland he hadn't had to do anything like that, not since he'd fought against the Emperor's Guardian.

 He smiled. It had been a grand battle, that fight against the Guardian. But even as he tried to remember it, the details skittered away like straws in the wind. It had been too long ago.

 Long ago like these flickers in the Force had been.

 C'baoth's fingers slipped away from his beard, to the medallion nestled against the skin of his chest. Squeezing the warm metal against his palm, he fought against the mists of the past, trying to see beyond them. Yes. Yes, he was not mistaken. These same flickers had come three times before in the past few seasons. Had come, had stayed for a time, and then once again had gone dormant. Like someone who had learned how to utilize the Force for a time, but then somehow forgotten.

 He didn't understand it. But it was of no threat to him, and so wasn't important.

 Above him, he could sense now the Imperial Star Destroyer entering high orbit, far above the clouds where none of the others on Jomark would see it. When night fell, the shuttle would come, and they would take him off somewhereTaanab, he thoughtto help coordinate yet another of these multiple Imperial attacks.

 He wasn't looking forward to the effort and pain. But it would all be worth it when he had his Jedi. He would remake them in his own image, and they would be his servants and his followers all the days of their lives.

 And then even Grand Admiral Thrawn would have to admit that he, Joruus C'baoth, had found the true meaning of power.

 

 CHAPTER
2

 "I'm sorry, Luke," Wedge Antilles' voice said over the comm, the words punctuated by occasional spittings of static. "I've tried every handle I can think of, including pulling all the rank I've got and some I haven't. It's still no go. Some data pusher up the riser somewhere has issued orders that the Sluissi's own defense ships have absolute top priority for repair work. Until we can find this guy and talk him into a special dispensation, we're not going to get anyone to touch your X-wing."

 Luke Skywalker grimaced, feeling four hours' worth of frustration welling up in his throat. Four precious hours wasted, with the end still not in sight, while on Coruscant the future of the entire New Republic was even now teetering on the edge. "Did you get this data pusher's name?" he asked.

 "I couldn't even get that," Wedge said. "Every line I've tried has disappeared about three layers up from the mechanics themselves. I'm still trying, but this whole place has gone kind of batty."

 "A major Imperial attack will do that to you," Luke conceded with a sigh. He could understand why the Sluissi had set their priorities the way they had; but it wasn't like he was just going off on a joyride, either. It was a good six-day flight from here to Coruscant as it was, and every hour that he was delayed was one more hour the political forces trying to oust Admiral Ackbar would have to consolidate their position. "Keep trying, okay? I've got to get out of here."

 "Sure," Wedge said. "Look, I know you're worried about what's happening on Coruscant. But any one person can only do so much. Even a Jedi."

 "I know," Luke agreed reluctantly. And Han was on his way back, and Leia was already there "I just hate sitting around being out of it."

 "Me, too." Wedge lowered his voice a bit. "You've still got one other option. Don't forget that."

 "I won't," Luke promised. It was certainly an option he'd been tempted to take his friend up on. But Luke wasn't officially a member of the New Republic military anymore; and with the New Republic forces here at the shipyards still at full alert, Wedge could face an immediate court martial for handing his X-wing over to a civilian. Councilor Borsk Fey'lia and his anti-Ackbar faction might not want to bother making an example out of someone as relatively low in rank as a starfighter wing commander. But then again, they might.

 Wedge, of course, knew all that better than Luke did. Which made the offer that much more generous. "I appreciate it," Luke told him. "But unless things get really desperate, it'll probably be better all around if I just wait for mine to get fixed."

 "Okay. How's General Calrissian doing?"

 "He's in roughly the same boat as my X-wing," Luke said dryly. "Every doctor and medical droid in the place is tied up treating battle injuries. Digging minor bits of metal and glass out of someone who's not currently bleeding is kind of low on their priority list at the moment."

 "I'll bet he's really pleased with that."

 "I've seen him happier," Luke admitted. "I'd better go give the medics another push. Why don't you get back to prodding the Sluissi bureaucracy from your endif we both push hard enough, maybe we can meet in the middle."

 Wedge chuckled. "Right. Talk to you later." With one final crackle of static, the comm cut off. "And good luck," Luke added softly as he got up from the public-use comm desk and headed off across the Sluis Van Central reception area toward the medical corridor. If the rest of the Sluissi equipment had been damaged as much as their in-system communications, it could be a long time indeed before anyone had enough spare time to put a couple of new hyperdrive motivators into a civilian's X-wing.

 Still, things weren't quite as dark as they could have been, he decided as he maneuvered his way carefully through the hurrying crowds that seemed to be going in all directions at once. There were several New Republic ships here, whose work crews might be more willing than the Sluissi themselves to bend the rules for a former officer like Luke. And if worse came to worst, he could try calling Coruscant to see if Mon Mothma could expedite matters any.

 The drawback to that approach was that calling for help would probably give the appearance of weakness and to show weakness in front of Councilor Fey'lya was not the right signal to be sending now.

 Or so it seemed to him. On the other hand, showing that he could get the head of the New Republic to give him personal attention could as easily be seen instead as a sign of strength and solidarity.

 Luke shook his head in mild frustration. It was, he supposed, a generally useful trait for a Jedi to be able to see both sides of an argument. It did, however, make the machinations of politics seem even murkier than they already were. Another good reason why he'd always tried to leave politics to Leia.

 He could only hope that she'd be equal to this particular challenge.

 The medical wing was as crowded as the rest of the huge Sluis Van Central space station, but here at least a large percentage of the inhabitants were sitting or lying quietly off to the side instead of running around. Threading his way between the, chairs and parked float gurneys, Luke reached the large ward room that had been turned into a waiting area for low-priority patients. Lando Calrissian, his expression and sense hovering somewhere between impatience and boredom, was sitting off in the far corner, holding a medpack desensitizer against his chest with one hand while balancing a borrowed data pad with the other. He was scowling at the latter as Luke came up. "Bad news?" Luke asked.

 "No worse than everything else that's happened to me lately," Lando said, dropping the data pad onto the empty chair beside him. "The price of hfredium has dropped again on the general market. If it doesn't come up a little in the next month or two, I'm going to be out a few hundred thousand."

 "Ouch," Luke agreed. "That's the main product of your Nomad City complex, isn't it?"

 "One of several main products, yes," Lando said with a grimace. "We're diversified enough that normally it wouldn't hurt us much. The problem is that lately I've been stockpiling the stuff expecting the price to go up. Now it's done just the opposite."

 Luke suppressed a smile. That was Lando, all right. Respectable and legitimate though he might have become, he was still not above dabbling in a little manipulative gambling on the side. "Well, if it helps any, I've got some good news for you. Since all the ships that the Imperials tried to steal belonged directly to the New Republic, we won't have to go through the local Sluissi bureaucracy to get your mole miners back. It'll just be a matter of submitting a proper claim to the Republic military commander and hauling them out of here."

 The lines in Lando's face eased a little. "That's great, Luke," he said. "I really appreciate ityou have no idea what I had to go through to get hold of those mole miners in the first place. Finding replacements would be a major headache."

 Luke waved the thanks away. "Under the circumstances, it was the least we could do. Let me go over to the routing station, see if I can hurry things up a little for you. Are you finished with the data pad?"

 "Sure, take it back. Anything new on your X-wing?"

 "Not really," Luke said, reaching past him to pick up the data pad. "They're still saying it'll take another few hours at least to"

 He caught the abrupt change in Lando's sense a second before the other's hand suddenly snaked up to grip his arm. "What is it?" Luke asked.

 Lando was staring at nothing, his forehead furrowed with concentration as be sniffed the air. "Where were you just now?" he demanded.

 "I went through the reception area to one of the public comm desks," Luke said. Lando wasn't just sniffing the air, he realized suddenly: he was sniffing at Luke's sleeve. "Why?"

 Lando let Luke's arm drop. "It's carababba tabac," he said slowly. "With some armudu spice mixed in. I haven't smelled that since" He looked up at Luke, his sense abruptly tightening even further. "It's Niles Ferrier. Has to be."

 "Who's Niles Ferrier?" Luke asked, feeling his heartbeat start to pick up speed. Lando's uneasiness was contagious.

 "Humanbig and built sort of thick," Lando said. "Dark hair, probably a beard, though that comes and goes. Probably smoking a long thin cigarra. No, of course he was smokingyou got some of the smoke on you. Do you remember seeing him?"

 "Hang on." Luke closed his eyes, reaching inward with the Force.

 Short-term memory enhancement was one of the Jedi skills he'd learned from Yoda. The pictures flowed swiftly backward in time: his walk to the medical wing, his conversation with Wedge, his hunt for a public comm desk

 And there he was. Exactly as Lando had described him, passing no more than three meters away. "Got him," he told Lando, freezing the picture in his memory.

 "Where's he going?"

 "Uh" Luke replayed the memory forward again. The man wandered in and out of his field of vision for a minute, eventually disappearing entirely as Luke found the comm desks he'd been hunting for. "Looks like he and a couple of other's were heading for Corridor Six."

 Lando had punched up a station schematic on the data pad.

 "Corridor Sixblast." He stood up, dropping both the data pad and the desensitizer onto his chair. "Come on, we'd better go check this out."

 "Check what out?" Luke asked, taking a long step to catch up as Lando hurried off through the maze of waiting patients to the door. "Who is this Niles Ferrier, anyway?"

 "He's one of the best spaceship thieves in the galaxy," Lando threw over his shoulder. "And Corridor Six leads to one of the staging areas for the repair teams. We'd better get out there before he palms a Corellian gunship or something and flies off with it."

 They made their way through the reception area and under the archway labeled "Corridor Six" in both delicate Sluissi carioglyphs and the blockier Basic letters. Here, to Luke's surprise, the crowds of people that seemed to be everywhere else had dropped off to barely a trickle. By the time they'd gone a hundred meters along the corridor, he and Lando were alone.

 "Youdid say this was one of the repair staging areas, didn't you?" he asked, reaching' out with Jedi senses as they walked. The lights and equipment in the offices and workrooms around them seemed to be functioning properly, and he could sense a handful of droids moving busily about their business. But apart from that the place seemed to be deserted.

 "Yes, I did," Lando said grimly. "The schematic said Corridors Five and Three are also being used, but there ought to be enough traffic to keep this one busy, too. I don't suppose you have a spare blaster on you?"

 Luke shook his head. "I don't carry a blaster anymore. Do you think we should call station security?"

 "Not if we want to find out what Ferrier's up to. He'll be all through the station computer and comm system by nowcall security and he'll just pull out and disappear back under a rock somewhere." He peered into one of the open office doorways as they passed it. "This is vintage Ferrier, all right. One of his favorite tricks is to fiddle work orders to route everyone out of the area he wants to"

 "Hold it," Luke cut him off. At the edge of his mind "I think I've got them. Six humans and two aliens, the nearest about two hundred meters straight ahead."

 "What kind of aliens?"

 "I don't know. I've never run into either species before."

 "Well, watch them. Aliens in Ferrier's gang are usually hired for their muscle. Let's go.

 "Maybe you should stay here," Luke suggested, unhooking his lightsaber from his belt. "I'm not sure how well I'll be able to protect you if they decide to make a fight of it."

 "I'll take my chances," Lando told him. "Ferrier knows me; maybe I can keep it from coming down to a fight. Besides, I've got an idea I want to try."

 They were just under twenty meters from the first human when Luke caught the change in sense from the group ahead. "They've spotted us," he murmured to Lando, shifting his grip slightly on his lightsaber.

 "You want to try talking to them?"

 "I don't know," Lando murmured back, craning his neck to look down the seemingly deserted corridor ahead. "We might need to get a little closer"

 It came as a flicker of movement from one of the doorways, and an abrupt ripple in the Force. "Duck!" Luke barked, igniting his lightsaber. With asnap-hiss the brilliant green-white blade appeared

 And moved almost of its own accord to neatly block the blaster bolt that shot toward them.

 "Get behind me!" Luke ordered Lando as a second bolt sizzled the air toward them. Guided by the Force, his hands again shifted the lightsaber blade into the path of the attack. A third bolt spattered from the blade, followed by a fourth. From a doorway farther down the corridor a second blaster opened up, adding its voice to the first.

 Luke held his ground, feeling the Force flowing into him and out through his arms, evoking an odd sort of tunnel vision effect that turned mental spotlights on the attack itself and relative darkness on everything else. Lando, half crouched directly behind him, was only a hazy sense in the back of his mind; the rest of Ferrier's people were even dimmer. Setting his teeth firmly together, letting the Force control his defense, he kept his eyes moving around the corridor, alert for new threats.

 He was looking directly at the odd shadow when it detached itself from the wall and started forward.

 For a long minute he didn't believe what he was seeing. There was no texture or detail to the shadow; nothing but a slightly fluid shape and nearly absolute blackness. But it was realand it was moving toward him. "Lando!" he shouted over the scream of blaster shots. "Five meters awayforty degrees left. Any ideas?"

 He heard the hissing intake of air from behind him. "Never seen anything like it. Retreat?"

 With an effort, Luke pulled as much of his concentration as he dared away from their defense and turned it toward the approaching shadow. There was indeed something there one of the alien intelligences, in fact, that he'd sensed earlier. Which implied it was one of Ferrier's people

 "Stay with me," he told Lando. This was going to be risky, but turning tail and running wouldn't accomplish anything. Moving slowly, keeping his stance balanced and yet fluid, he headed directly toward the shadow.

 The alien halted, its sense clearly surprised that a potential prey would be advancing instead of backing away from it. Luke took advantage of the momentary hesitation to move farther toward the corridor wall to his left. The first blaster, its shots starting to come close to the mobile shadow as it tracked Luke's movement, abruptly ceased fire. The shadow's form shifted slightly, giving Luke the impression of something looking over its shoulder. He continued moving to his left, drawing the second blaster's fire toward the shadow as he did so; and a second later it, too, fell reluctantly silent.

 "Good job," Lando murmured approvingly in his' ear. "Allow me."

 He took a step back from Luke. "Ferrier?" he called. "This is Lando Calrissian. Listen, if you want to keep your pal here in one piece, you'd better call him off. This is Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight. The guy who took down Darth Vader."

 Which wasn't strictly true, of course. But it was close enough. Lukehad , after all, defeated Vader in their last lightsaber duel, even if he hadn't actually gone on to kill him.

 Regardless, the implications weren't lost on the unseen men down the corridor. He could sense the doubt and consternation among them; and even as he lifted his lightsaber a little higher, the shadow stopped its approach. "What was your name?" someone called.

 "Lando Calrissian," Lando repeated. "Think back to that botched Phraetiss operation about ten years ago.

 "Oh, I remember," the voice said grimly. "What do you want?"

 "I want to offer you a deal," Lando said. "Come on out and we'll talk."

 There was a moment of hesitation. Then, the big man from Luke's memory track stepped out from behind a group of crates that had been stacked against the corridor wall, the simmering cigarra still clenched between his teeth. "All of you," Lando insisted. "Come on, Ferrier, bring them out. Unless you seriously think you can hide them from a Jedi."

 Ferrier's eyes flicked to Luke. "The mystic Jedi powers have always been exaggerated," he sneered. But his lips moved inaudibly; and, even as he approached them, five humans and a tall, thin, green-scaled insectoid alien emerged one by one from concealment.

 "That's better," Lando said approvingly, stepping out from behind Luke. "A Verpine, huh?" he added, waving toward the insectoid alien. "Got to hand it to you, Ferrieryou're fast. Maybe thirty hours since the Imperials pulled out, and already you're on board. And with a tame Verpine, yet. You ever heard of Verpine, Luke?"

 Luke nodded. The alien's appearance wasn't familiar, but the name was. "They're supposed to be geniuses at fixing and reassembling high-tech devices."

 "And it's a well-deserved reputation," Lando said. "Rumor has it they're the ones who helped Admiral Ackbar design the B-wing starfighter. You shifted specialties to palming damaged ships, Ferrier? Or did your Verpine come aboard just for the occasion?"

 "You mentioned a deal," Ferrier said coldly. "So deal."

 "I want to know first if you were in on the Sluis Van attack from the beginning," Lando said, matching Ferrier's tone. "If you're working for the Empire, we can't deal."

 One of the gang, blaster in hand, took a quiet preparatory breath. Luke shifted his lightsaber toward him slightly in warning, and the brief thought of heroics faded quickly away. Ferrier looked at the man, back at Lando. "The Empire's sent out a call for ships," he said grudgingly. "Warships in particular. They're paying a bounty of twenty percent above market value for anything over a hundred thousand tons that can fight."

 Luke and Lando exchanged a quick glance. "Odd request," Lando said. "They lose one of their shipyard facilities or something?"

 "They didn't say, and I didn't ask," Ferrier said acidly. "I'm a businessman; I give the customer what he wants. You here to deal, or just talk?"

 "I'm here to deal," Lando assured him. "You know, Ferrier, it seems to me that you're in sort of a jam here. We've nailed you red-handed in the process of trying to steal New Republic warships. We've also pretty well proved that Luke can take all of you without any trouble. All I have to do is whistle up Security and the whole bunch of you will be off to a penal colony for the next few years."

 The shadow, which had been standing still, took a step forward. "The Jedi might survive," Ferrier said darkly. "But you wouldn't."

 "Maybe; maybe not," lando said easily. "Regardless, it's not the sort of situation a businessman like yourself wants to be in. So here's the deal: you leave now, and we'll let you get out of the Sluis Van system before we drop the hammer with the authorities."

 "How very generous of you," Ferrier said, heavily sarcastic. "So what do youreally want? A cut of the operation? Or just a wad of money?"

 Lando shook his head. "I don't want your money. I just want you out of here."

 "I don't take well to threats."

 "Then take it as a friendly warning for past associations' sake," Lando said, his voice hard. "But take it seriously."

 For a long minute the only sound in the corridor was the quiet background hum of distant machinery. Luke held himself in combat stance, trying to read the shifting emotions in Ferrier's sense. "Your 'deal' would cost us a lot of money," Ferrier said, shifting the cigarra to the other side of his mouth.

 "I realize that," Lando conceded. "And believe it or not, I am sorry. But the New Republic can't afford to lose any ships at the moment. However, you might try over at the Amorris system. Last I heard, the Cavrilhu pirate gang was using that as a base, and they're always in need of expert maintenance people." He looked appraisingly at the shadow. "And extra muscle, too."

 Ferrier followed his gaze. "Ah, you like my wraith, do you?"

 "Wraith?" Luke frowned.

 "They call themselves Defel," Ferrier said. "But I think 'wraith' suits them so much better. Their bodies absorb all visible light7some sort of evolved survival mechanism." He eyed Luke. "And what doyou think of this deal, Jedi? Enforcer of law and justice that you are?"

 Luke had expected the question. "Have you stolen anything here?" he countered. "Or done anything illegal other than breaking into the station's assignment computer?"

 Ferrier's lip twisted. "We also shot at a couple of bizits who were poking their noses in where they shouldn't have," he said sarcastically. "That count?"

 "Not when you didn't hit them," Luke countered evenly. "As far as I'm concerned, you can leave."

 "You're too kind," Ferrier growled. "So is that it?"

 "That's it," Lando nodded. "Oh, and I want your slicer access code, too."

 Ferrier glared at him, but gestured to the Verpine standing behind him. Silently, the tall green alien lurched forward and handed Lando a pair of data cards. "Thank you," Lando said. "All right. I'll give you one hour to get your ship up and out of the system before we drop the hammer. Have a good trip."

 "Yeah, we'll do that," Ferrier bit out. "So good to see you, Calrissian. Maybe next time I can doyou a favor."

 "Give Amorris a try," Lando urged him. "I'd bet they've got at least a couple of old Sienar patrol ships you could relieve them of."

 Ferrier didn't reply. In silence, the group passed Lando and Luke and headed back down the empty corridor toward the reception area. "You sure telling him about Amorris was a good idea?" Luke murmured as he watched them go. "The Empire's likely to get a patrol ship or two out of the deal."

 "Would you rather they have gotten hold of a Calamarian Star Cruiser?" Lando countered. "Ferrier's probably good enough to have palmed one. Certainly with things as confused out there as they are." He shook his head thoughtfully. "I wonder what's going on over in the Empire. It doesn't make sense to pay premium prices for used ships when you've got the facilities to make your own."

 "Maybe they're having some trouble," Luke suggested, closing down the lightsaber and returning it to his belt. "Or maybe they've lost one of their Star Destroyers but managed to save the crew and need ships to put them on."

 "I suppose that's possible," Lando conceded doubtfully. "Hard to imagine an accident that would destroy any ship beyond repair but leave the crew alive. Well, we can get the word back to Coruscant. Let the Intelligence hotshots figure out what it means."

 "If they're not all too busy playing politics," Luke said. Because if Councilor Fey'lya's group was also trying to take over Military Intelligence He shook the thought away. Worrying about the situation wasn't productive. "So what now? We give Ferrier his hour and then hand those slicer codes over to the Sluissi?"

 "Oh, we'll give Ferrier his hour, all right," Lando said, frowning thoughtfully at the departing group. `But the slicer codes are another matter. It occurred to me on the way in that if Ferrier was using them to divert workers from this end of the station, there's no particular reason why we can't also use them to bump your X-wing to the top of the priority stack."

 "Ah," Luke said. It was, he knew, not exactly the sort of marginally legal activity a Jedi should participate in. But under the circumstancesand given the urgency of the situation back on Coruscant-bending some rules in this case was probably justified. "When do we get started?"

 "Right now," Lando said, and Luke couldn't help wincing at the quiet relief in the other's voice and sense. Clearly, he'd been half afraid that Luke would raise those same awkward ethical questions about the suggestion. "With any luck, you'll be up and ready to fly before I have to give these things to the Sluissi. Come on, let's go find a terminal."

 

 CHAPTER
3

 "Landing request acknowledged and confirmed,Millennium Falcon ," the voice of the Imperial Palace air control director came over the comm. "You're cleared for pad eight. Councilor Organa Solo will meet you."

 "Thanks, Control," Han Solo said, easing the ship down toward the Imperial City and eyeing with distaste the dark cloud cover that hung over the whole region like some brooding menace. He'd never put much stock in omens, but those clouds sure didn't help his mood any.

 And speaking of bad moods Reaching over, he tapped the ship's intercom switch. "Get ready for landing," he called. "We're coming into our approach."

 "Thank yo, Captain Solo," C-3PO's stiffly precise voice came back. A little stiffer than usual, actually; the droid must still be nursing a wounded ego. Or whatever it was that passed for ego in droids.

 Han shut off the intercom, lip twisting with some annoyance of his own as he did so. He'd never really liked droids much. He'd used them occasionally, but never more than he'd absolutely had to. Threepio wasn't as bad as some of those he'd known but then, he'd never spent six days alone in hyperspace with any of the others, either.

 He'd tried. He really had, if for no other reason than that Leia rather liked Threepio and would have wanted them to get along. The first day out from Sluis Van he'd let Threepio sit up front in the cockpit with him, enduring the droid's prissy voice and trying valiantly to hold something resembling a real conversation with him. The second day, he'd let Threepio do most of the talking, and had spent a lot of his time working in maintenance crawlways where there wasn't room for two. Threepio had accepted the limitation with typical mechanical cheerfulness, and had chattered at him from outside the crawlway access hatches.

 By the afternoon of the third day, he'd banned the droid from his presence entirely.

 Leia wouldn't like it when she found out. But she'd have liked it even less if he'd given in to his original temptation and converted the droid into a set of backup alluvial dampers.

 TheFalcon was through the cloud layer now and in sight of the monstrosity that was the Emperor's old palace. Banking slightly, Han confirmed that pad eight was clear and brought them down.

 Leia must have been waiting just inside the canopy that shrouded the pad's accessway, because she was already beside the ship as Han lowered theFalcon 's ramp. "Han," she said, her voice laced with tension. "Thank the Force you're back."

 "Hi, sweetheart," he said, being careful not to press too hard against the increasingly prominent bulge of her belly as he hugged her. The muscles in her shoulders and back felt tight beneath his arms. "I'm glad to see you, too.

 She clutched him to her for a moment, then gently disengaged. "Come onwe've got to go.

 Chewbacca was waiting for them just inside the accessway, his bowcaster slung over his shoulder in ready position. "Hey, Chewie," Han nodded, getting a growled Wookiee greeting in return. "Thanks for taking care of Leia."

 The other rumbled something strangely noncommittal in reply. Han eyed him, decided this wasn't the time to press for details of their stay on Kashyyyk. "What've I missed?" he asked Leia instead.

 "Not much," she said as she led the way down the ramp corridor and into the Palace proper. "After that first big flurry of accusations, Fey'lya's apparently decided to cool things down. He's talked the Council into letting him take over some of Ackbar's internal security duties, but he's been behaving more like a caretaker than a new administrator. He's also hinted broadly that he'd be available to take charge of the Supreme Command, but he hasn't done any real pushing in that direction."

 "Doesn't want anyone to panic," Han suggested. "Accusing someone like Ackbar of treason is a big enough bite for people to chew on as it is. Anything more and they might start choking on it."

 "That's my feeling, too," Leia agreed. "Which should give us at least a little breathing space to try and figure out this bank thing."

 "Yeah, what's the lowdown on that, anyway?" Han asked. "All you told me was that some routine bank check had found a big chunk of money in one of Ackbar's accounts.

 "It turns out it wasn't just a routine check," Leia said. "There was a sophisticated electronic break-in at the central clearing bank on Coruscant the morning of the Sluis Van attack, with several big accounts being hit. The investigators ran a check on all the accounts the bank served and discovered that there'd been a large transfer into Ackbar's account that same morning from the central bank on Palanhi. You familiar with Palanhi?"

 "Everybody knows Palanhi," Han said sourly. "Little crossroads planet with an overblown idea of their own importance."

 "And the firm belief that if they can stay neutral enough they can play both sides of the war to their own profit," Leia said. "Anyway, the central bank there claims that the money didn't come from Palanhi itself and must have just been transferred through them. So far our people haven't been able to backtrack it any further."

 Han nodded. "I'll bet Fey'lya's got some ideas where it came from."

 "The ideas aren't unique to him," Leia sighed. "He was just the first one to voice them, that's all."

 "And to make himself a few points at Ackbar's expense," Han growled. "Where've they put Ackbar, anyway? The old prison section?"

 Leia shook her head. "He's under a sort of loose house arrest in his quarters while the investigation is under way. More evidence that Fey'lya's trying not to ruffle any more feathers than he has to."

 "Or else that he knows full well there isn't enough here to hang a stunted Jawa from," Han countered. "Has he got anything on Ackbar besides the bank thing?"

 Leia smiled wanly. "Just the near-fiasco at Sluis Van. And the fact that it was Ackbar who sent all those warships out there in the first place."

 "Point," Han conceded, trying to recall the old Rebel Alliance regulations on military prisoners. If he remembered correctly, an officer under house arrest could receive visitors without those visitors first having to go through more than minor amounts of bureaucratic datawork.

 Though he could easily be wrong about that. They'd made him learn all that stuff back when he'd first let them slap an officer's rank on him after the Battle of Yavin. But regulations were never something he'd taken seriously. "How much of the Council does Fey'lya have on his side?" he asked Leia.

 "If you meansolidly on his side, only a couple," she said. "If you mean leaning in his direction well, you'll be able to judge for yourself in a minute."

 Han blinked. Lost in his own mulling of the mess, he hadn't really paid attention to where Leia was taking him. Now, with a start, he suddenly realized they were walking down the Grand Corridor that linked the Council chamber with the much larger Assemblage auditorium. "Wait a minute," he protested."Now?"

 "I'm sorry, Han," she sighed. "Mon Mothma insisted. You're the first person back who was actually at the Sluis Van attack, and there are a million questions they want to ask you about it."

 Han looked around the corridor: at the high, convoluted vaulting of the ceiling; the ornate carvings and cutglass windows alternating on the walls; the rows of short, greenish-purple saplings lining each side. The Emperor had supposedly designed the Grand Corridor personally, which probably explained why Han had always disliked the place. "I knew I should have sent Threepio out first," he growled.

 Leia took his arm. "Come on, soldier. Take a deep breath and let's get it over with. Chewie, you'd better wait out here."

 The usual Council chamber arrangement was a scaled-up version of the smaller Inner Council room: an oval table in the center for the Councilors themselves, with rows of seats along the walls for their aides and assistants. Today, to Han's surprise, the room had been reconfigured more along the lines of the huge Assemblage Commons. The seats were in neat, slightly tiered rows, with each counscilor surrounded by his or her assistants. In the front of the room, on the lowest level, Mon Mothma sat alone at a simple lectern, looking like a lecturer in a classroom. "Whose idea was this?" Han murmured as he and Leia started down the side aisle toward what was obviously a witness chair next to Mon Mothma's desk.

 "Mon Mothma set it up," she murmured. "I'd be willing to bet it was Fey'lya's idea, though."

 Han frowned. He'd have thought that underlining Mon Mothma's preeminent role in the Council like this would be the last thing Fey'lya would want. "I don't get it."

 She nodded toward the lectern. "Giving Mon Mothma the whole spotlight helps calm any fears that he plans to make a bid for her position. At the same time, putting the Councilors and their aides together in little groups tends to isolate the Councilors from each other."

 "I get it," Han nodded back. "Slippery little fuzzball, isn't he?"

 "Yes, he is," Leia said. "And he's going to milk this Sluis Van thing for all it's worth. Watch yourself."

 They reached the front and separated, Leia going to the first row and sitting down next to her aide, Winter, Han continuing on to Mon Mothma and the witness chair waiting for him. "You want me sworn in or anything?" he asked without preamble.

 Mon Mothma shook her head. "That won't be necessary, Captain Solo," she said, her voice formal and a little strained. "Please sit down. There are some questions the Council would like to ask you about the recent events at the Sluis Van shipyards."

 Han took his seat. Fey'lya and his fellow Bothans, he saw, were in the group of front-row seats next to Leia's group. There were no empty seats anywhere that might have signified Admiral Ackbar's absence, at least not in the front where they should have been. The Councilors, seated according to rank, had apparently shuffled positions so as to each be closer to the front. Another reason for Fey'lya to have pushed this configuration, Han decided: at the usual oval table, Abkbar's seat might have been left vacant.

 "First of all, Captain Solo," Mon Mothma began, "we would like you to describe your role in the Sluis Van attack. When you arrived, what happened subsequentlythat sort of thing."

 "We got there pretty much as the battle was starting," Han said. "Came in just ahead of the Star Destroyers. We picked up a call from Wedgethat's Wing Commander Wedge Antilles of Rogue Squadronsaying,g that there were TIE fighters loose in the shipyards"

 "Excuse me?" Fey'lya interrupted smoothly. "Just who is the 'we' here?"

 Han focused on the Bothan. On those violet eyes, that soft, cream-colored fur, that totally bland expression. "My, crew consisted of Luke Skywalker and Lando Calrissian." As Fey'lya no doubt knew perfectly well already. Just a cheap trick to throw Han off stride. "Oh, and two droids. You want their serial numbers?"

 A slight rustle of not-quite humor ran through the room, and Han had the minor satisfaction of seeing that cream-colored fur flatten a little. "Thank you, no," Fey'lya said.

 "Rogue Squadron was engaged with a group of approximately forty TIE fighters and fifty stolen mole miners that had somehow been smuggled into the shipyards," Han continued. "We gave them some assistance with the fighters, figured out that the Imperials were using the mole miners to try and steal some of the capital ships that had been pressed into cargo duty, and were able to stop them. That's about it."

 "You're too modest, Captain Solo," Fey'lya spoke up again. "According to the reports we've received here, it was you and Calrissian who managed singlehandedly to thwart the Empire's scheme."

 Han braced himself. Here it came. He and Lando had stopped the Imperials, all right only they'd had to fry the nerve centers of over forty capital ships to do it. "I'm sorry about wrecking the ships," he said, looking Fey'lya straight in the eye. "Would you rather the Imperials have taken them intact?"

 A ripple ran through the Bothan's fur. "Really, Captain Solo," he said soothingly. "I have no particular quarrel with your method of stopping the Empire's attempt at grand larceny, costly though it might have been. You had only what you could work with. Within your constraints, you and the others succeeded brilliantly."

 Han frowned, feeling suddenly a little off balance. He had expected Fey'lya to try to make him the man under the hammer on this one. For once, the Bothan seemed to have missed a bet. "Thank you, Councilor," he said, for lack of anything better to say.

 "Which is not to say that the Empire's attempt and near-victory are not important, Fey'lya said, his fur rippling the opposite direction this time as he looked around the room. "On the contrary. At the best, they speak of serious misjudgments on the part of our military commanders. At the worst they may speak of treason."

 Han felt his lip twist. So that was it. Fey'lya hadn't changed his stripes; he'd simply decided not to waste a golden opportunity like this on a nobody like Han. "With all due respect, Councilor," he spoke up quickly, "what happened at Sluis Van wasn't Admiral Ackbar's fault. The whole operation"

 "Excuse me, Captain Solo," Fey'lya cut him off. "And with all due respect toyou, let me point out that the reason those capital ships were sitting at Sluis Van in the first place, undermanned and vulnerable, was that Admiral Ackbar had ordered them there."

 "There isn't anything like treason involved," Han insisted doggedly. "We already know that the Empire's got a tap into our communications"

 "And who's responsible for such failures of security?" Fey'lya shot back. "Once again, the blame falls squarely around Admiral Ackbar's shoulders."

 "Well, then,you find the leak," Han snapped. Peripherally, he could see Leia shaking her head urgently at him, but he was too mad now to care whether he was being properly respectful or not. "And while you're at it, I'd like to see how wellyou would do up against an Imperial Grand Admiral."

 The low-level buzz of conversation that had begun in the room cut off abruptly. "What was that last?" Mon Mothma asked.

 Silently, Han swore at himself. He hadn't meant to spring this on anyone until he'd had a chance to check it out himself at the Palace archives. But it was too late now. "The Empire's being led by a Grand Admiral," he muttered. "I saw him myself."

 The silence hung thick in the air. Mon Mothma recovered first. "That's impossible," she said, sounding more like she wanted to believe it than that she really did. "We've accounted for all the Grand Admirals."

 "I saw him myself," Han repeated.

 "Describe him," Fey'lya said. "What did he look like?"

 "He wasn't human," Han said. "At least, not completely. He had a roughly human build, but he had light blue skin, a kind of bluish black hair, and eyes that glowed red. I don't know what species he was."

 "Yet we know that the Emperor didn't like nonhumans," Mon Mothma reminded him.

 Han looked at Leia. The skin of her face was tight, her eyes staring at and through him with a kind of numb horror. She understood what this meant, all right. "He was wearing a white uniform," he told Mon Mothma. "No other Imperial officers wore anything like that. And the contact I was with specifically called him a Grand Admiral."

 "Obviously a self-granted promotion," Fey'lya said briskly. "Some regular admiral or perhaps a leftover Moff trying to rally the remains of the Empire around him. Anyway, that's beside the immediate point."

 "Beside the point?" Han demanded. "Look, Councilor, if there's a Grand Admiral running around loose"

 "If there is," Mon Mothma interrupted firmly, "we'll soon know for certain. Until then, there seems little value in holding a debate in a vacuum. Council Research is hereby directed to look into the possibility that a Grand Admiral might still be alive. Until such an investigation has been completed, we will continue with our current inquiry into the circumstances of the Sluis Van attack." She looked at Han, then turned and nodded at Leia. "Councilor Organa Solo, you may begin the questioning."

 

 Admiral Ackbar's high-domed, salmon-colored head bent slightly to the side, his huge round eyes swiveling in their sockets in a Calamarian gesture Leia couldn't recall ever having seen before. Surprise? Or was it perhaps dread?

 "A Grand Admiral," Ackbar said at last, his voice sounding even more gravelly than usual. "An Imperial Grand Admiral. Yes. That would indeed explain a great many things."

 "We don't actuallyknow that it's a real Grand Admiral yet," Leia cautioned him, throwing a glance at the stony look on her husband's face. Han, clearly, had no doubts of his own. Neither did she, for that matter. "Mon Mothma's having Research look into it."

 "They won't find anything," Ackbar said, shaking his head. A more human gesture, that, of the sort he usually tried to use when dealing with humans. Good; that meant he was getting back on balance. "I had a thorough search made of the Imperial records when we first took Coruscant back from the Empire. There's nothing in there but a list of the Grand Admirals' names and a little about their assignments."

 "Erased before they pulled out," Han growled.

 "Or perhaps never there to begin with," Leia suggested. "Remember that these weren't just the best and brightest military leaders the Emperor could find. They were also part of his plan to bring the Imperial military more personally under his control."

 "As was the Death Star project itself," Ackbar said. "I agree, Councilor. Until the Grand Admirals were fully integrated both militarilyand politically, there was no reason to publish details of their identities. And every reason to conceal them."

 "So," Han said. "Dead end."

 "It appears that way," Ackbar agreed. "Any information we're going to get will have to come from current sources.

 Leia looked at Han. "You mentioned you were with a contact when you saw this Grand Admiral, but you didn't give us the contact's name."

 "That's right," Han nodded. "I didn't. And I'm not going to. Not now, anyway."

 Leia frowned at that unreadable sabacc face, stretching out with all her rudimentary Jedi skills to try to sense his purpose and feelings. It didn't get her very far.If only I had more time to practice, she thought ruefully. But if the Council had needed all her time before, it was going to need even more than that now. "Mon Mothma's going to want to know, eventually," she warned him.

 "And I'm going to tell her, eventually," he came back. "Until then, it's going to be our little secret."

 "As in 'leverage'?"

 "You never can tell." A shadow of something crossed Han's face. "The name's not going to do the Council any good right now, anyway. The whole group's probably buried themselves away somewhere. If the Empire hasn't caught up with them."

 "You don't know how to find them?" Leia asked.

 Han shrugged. "There's a ship I promised to get out of impoundment for them. I can try that."

 "Do what you can," Ackbar said. "You said Councilor Organa Solo's brother was with you at Sluis Van?"

 "Yes, sir," Han said. "His hyperdrive needed some repairs, but he should've only been a couple of hours behind me." He looked at Leia. "Oh, and we're going to have to get Lando's ship back to him at Sluis Van."

 Ackbar made a noise that sounded something like a choked whistle: the Calamarian equivalent of a grunt. "We'll need to hear testimony from both of them," he said. "And from Wing Commander Antilles, as well. It's vital that we learn how the Empire was able to smuggle such a large force past so many sensors.

 Leia threw Han a look. "According to Wedge's preliminary report, they apparently were inside a freighter whose bold registered empty."

 Ackbar's eyes swiveled in their sockets. "Empty? Not merely unreadable, as if from a sensor misfire or static-damping?"

 "Wedge said it was empty," Han told him. "He ought, to know the difference between that and static-damping.

 "Empty." Ackbar seemed to slump a little in his seat. "Which can only mean the Empire has finally developed a workable cloaking shield."

 "It's starting to look that way," Leia agreed soberly. "I suppose the only good news is that they must still have some bugs left in the system. Otherwise, they could have simply cloaked the whole Sluis Van task force and torn the place to ribbons."

 "No," Ackbar said, shaking his massive head. "That's something we won't have to worry about, at least. By its very nature a cloaking shield would be more, danger to the user than it was worth. A cloaked warship's own sensor beams would be as useless as those of its enemies, leaving it to flail about totally blind. Worse, if it were under power, the enemy could locate it by simply tracking its drive emissions."

 "Ah," Leia said. "I hadn't thought of that."

 "There have been rumors for years that the Emperor was developing a cloaking shield," Ackbar said. "I've put a good deal of thought into the contingency." He harrumphed. "But the weaknesses are of small comfort. A cloaking shield in the hands of a Grand Admiral would still be a dangerous weapon indeed. He would find ways to use it against us.

 "He already has," Han muttered.

 "Apparently so." Ackbar's swiveling eyes locked onto Leia's face. "You must get me cleared of this ridiculous charge, Councilor. As soon as possible. For all his ambition and self-confidence, Councilor Fey'lya hasn't the tactical skills we need against a threat of this magnitude."

 "We'll get you released, Admiral," Leia promised, wishing she felt that confident. "We're working on it right now.

 There was a diffident knock, and behind Leia the door opened. "Excuse me," the squat G-2RD droid said in a mechanically resonant voice. "Your time has expired."

 "Thank you," Leia said, suppressing her frustration as she stood up. She wanted desperately to have more time with Ackbar, to explore with him both this new Imperial threat and also discuss the legal strategies they might use in his defense. But arguing with the droid would gain her nothing, and might get her visiting privileges revoked entirely. Guard droids were allowed that kind of discretion, and the 2RD series in particular was reputed to be a touchy lot. "I'll be back soon, Admiral," she told Ackbar. "Either this afternoon or tomorrow.

 "Good-bye, Councilor." There was just a brief hesitation"And to you, Captain Solo. Thank you for coming."

 "Good-bye, Admiral," Han said.

 They stepped from the room and started down the wide corridor, the G-2RD taking up position at the door behind them. "That must have hurt," Han commented.

 "What must have?" Leia asked.

 "Thanking me for coming."

 She frowned up at him, but there was nothing but seriousness in his face. "Oh, come on, Han. Just because you resigned your commission"

 "He considers me one step up from a complete traitor," Han finished for her.

 An obvious retort about persecution complexes flashed through Leia's mind. "Ackbar's never been what you'd call an outgoing person," she said instead.

 Han shook his head. "I'm not imagining it, Leia. Ask Lando sometimehe gets the same kind of treatment. You leave the military and you might as well be tauntaun spit as far as Ackbar is concerned."

 Leia sighed. "You have to understand the Mon Calamari ethos, Han. They were never a warlike species at all until the Empire started enslaving them and ravaging their world. Those wonderful Star Cruisers of theirs were originally passenger liners, you know, that we helped them convert into warships. Maybe it's not so much anger at you for quitting as it is some sort of residual guilt at himself and his people for taking up warfare in the first place."

 "Even if they were forced into it?"

 Leia shrugged uncomfortably. "I don't think anyone ever goes into a war without the nagging feeling that there might have been,some other way. Even when every other way has already been tried and hasn't worked. I knowI felt it when I first joined the Rebellionand believe me, people like Mon Mothma and Bail Organa had tried everything. For an inherently peaceful race like the Mon Calamari, the feeling must be even worse.

 "Wellmaybe," Han conceded grudgingly. "I just wish they'd work it through for themselves and leave the rest of us out of it.

 "They are," Leia assured him. "We've just got to give them time."

 He looked down at her. "You haven't told me yet why you and Chewie left Kashyyyk and came back here."

 Leia squeezed thumb and forefinger together. Eventually, she knew, she would have to tell Han about the deal she'd made with the Noghri commando Khabarakh. But walking down a public corridor of the Imperial Palace wasn't the place for that kind of discussion. "There didn't seem any point in staying," she told him. "There was another attack"

 "Therewhat ?"

 "Relax, we fought it off" she soothed him. "And I've made arrangements that should keep me safe, at least for the next couple of weeks. I'll tell you about it later, when we're someplace more secure.

 She could feel his eyes boring into her; could sense the suspicion in his mind that there was something she wasn't telling him. But he recognized as well as she did the danger of speaking secrets out in the open. "All right," he muttered. "I just hope you know what you're doing."

 Leia shivered, focusing on the sense of the twins she carried within her. So potentially strong in the Force and yet so utterly helpless. "So do I," she whispered.

 

 CHAPTER
4

 JORUS C'BAOTH. HUMAN. BORN IN REITECAS, ON BORTRAS, ON 4\3\112. PRE-EMPIRE DATE.

 

 Luke made a face as he watched the words scroll up the Old Senate Library computer screen. What was it about new regimes, he wondered, that one of their first official acts always seemed to be the creation of a new dating system, which they then went and applied to all existing historical records? The Galactic Empire had done that, as had the Old Republic before it. He could only hope that the New Republic wouldn't follow suit. History was hard enough to keep track of as it was.

 ATTENDED MIRNIC UNIVERSITY 6\4\95 TO 4\32\90 PE. ATTENDED JEDI TRAINING CENTER ON KAMPARAS 2\15\90 TO 8\33\8 PE. PRIVATE JEDI TRAINING BEGUN 9\88 PE; INSTRUCTOR UNKNOWN. GRANTED TITLE OF JEDI KNIGHT 3\6\86 PE. OFFICIALLY ASSUMED TITLE OF JEDI MASTER 4\3\74 PE. SUMMARY ENDS FURTHER DETAILS OF SCHOOLING AND TRAINING?

 

 "No," Luke said, frowning. C'baoth hadassumed the title of Jedi Master? He'd always been under the impression that that title, like the rank of Jedi Knight itself, was something that was granted by the rest of the Jedi community and not simply self-proclaimed. "Give me the highlights of his record as a Jedi."

 MEMBER OF ANDO DEMILITARIZATION OBSERVATION GROUP 8\82 TO 7\81 PE. MEMBER OF SENATE INTERSPECIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE 9\81 TO 6\79 PE. PERSONAL JEDI ADVISER TO SENATOR PALPATINE 6\79 TO's\77

 

 "Stop," Luke ordered, a sudden shiver running up his back. Jedi adviser to SenatorPalpatine ? "Detail C'baoth's service to Senator Palpatine."

 The computer seemed to consider the request.UNAVAILABLE , the answer came at last.

 "Unavailable, or just classified?" Luke countered.

 UNAVAILABLE, the computer repeated.

 Luke grimaced. But there was little he could do about it for the moment. "Continue."

 MEMBER OF JEDI FORCE ASSEMBLED TO OPPOSE THE DARK JEDI INSURRECTION ON BPFASSH 7\77 TO 1\74 PE. ASSISTED IN RESOLVING ALDERAAN ASCENDANCY CONTENTION 11\7O PE. ASSISTED JEDI MASTER TRA'S M'INS IN MEDIATION OF DUINUOGWUIN-GOTAL CONFLICT l\68 TO 4\66 PE. NAMED AMBASSADOR AT LARGE TO XAPPYH SECTOR 8\21\62 PE BY SENATE. HIGHLY INSTRUMENTAL IN CONVINCING SENATE TO AUTHORIZE AND FUND OUTBOUND FLIGHT PROJECT. ONE OF SIX JEDI MASTERS ATTACHED TO PROJECT 7\7\65 PE. NO RECORD EXISTS AFTER PROJECT DEPARTURE FROM YAGA MINOR, 4\1\64. HIGHLIGHTS SUMMARY ENDS. FURTHER INFORMATION?

 

 Luke leaned back in his chair, gazing at the display and chewing at the inside of his cheek. So not only had C'baoth once been an adviser to the man who would someday declare himself Emperor, but he'd also been part of the attack against those Dark Jedi from the Sluis sector that Leia had told him about. One of whom had survived long enough to face Master Yoda on Dagobah

 There was a soft footstep behind him. "Commander?"

 "Hello, Winter," Luke said without turning. "Looking for me?"

 "Yes," Winter said, coming up to stand beside him. "Princess Leia would like to see you whenever you're finished here." She nodded at the display, running a hand through her silky white hair as she did so. "More Jedi research?"

 "Sort of" Luke told her, sliding a data card into the terminal's slot. "computer: copy complete record of Jedi Master Jorus C'baoth."

 "Jorus C'baoth," Winter repeated thoughtfully.

 "Wasn't he involved in the big ascendancy flap on Alderaan?"

 "That's what the record says," Luke nodded. "You know anything about that?"

 "No more than any other Alderaanian," Winter said. Even with her rigid control some of the pain leaked through to her voice, and Luke found himself wincing in sympathy with it. For Leia, he knew, the destruction of Alderaan and the loss of her family was a heartrending but slowly fading ache in the back corners of her mind. For winter, with her perfect and indelible memory, the pain would probably go on forever. "The question was whether the line of ascent to Viceroy should go to Bail Organa's father or one of the other family lines," Winter continued. "After the third voting deadlock they appealed to the Senate to mediate the issue. C'baoth was one of the delegation they sent, which took less than a month to decide that the Organas had the proper claim."

 "Did you ever see any pictures of C'baoth?" Luke asked.

 Winter considered. "There was a group holo in the archives that showed the entire mediation team," she said after a moment. "C'baoth wasoh, about average height and build, I suppose. Fairly muscular, too, which I remember thinking seemed rather odd for a Jedi." She looked at Luke, coloring slightly. "I'm sorry; I didn't mean that to sound derogatory."

 "No problem," Luke assured her. It was a common misconception, he'd discovered: with mastery over the Force, people just assumed there was no reason for a Jedi to cultivate physical strength. It had taken Luke himself several years to truly appreciate the subtle ways in which control of the body was linked to control of the mind. "What else?

 "He had graying hair and a short, neatly trimmed beard," Winter said. "He was wearing the same brown robe and white undertunic that a lot of Jedi seemed to favor. Other than that, there wasn't anything particularly notable about him."

 Luke rubbed his chin. "How old did he look?"

 "Oh I'd say somewhere around forty," Winter said. "Plus or minus five years, perhaps. Age is always hard to ascertain from a picture."

 "That would fit with the record here," Luke agreed, retrieving the data card from the slot. But if the record was right "You said Leia wanted to see me?" he asked, standing up."

 "If it's convenient," Winter nodded. "She's in her office."

 "Okay. Let's go."

 They left the library and started down the cross corridor linking the research areas with the Council and Assemblage chambers. "You know anything about the planet Bortras?" he asked Winter as they walked. "Specifically, anything about how long its people live?"

 She thought a moment. "I've never read anything that mentioned it one way or another. Why?"

 Luke hesitated; but however the Imperials were getting information out of the New Republic's inner sanctum, Winter was certainly far above suspicion. "The problem is that if this alleged Jedi out on Jomark really is Jorus C'baoth, he has to be over a hundred by now. I know there are some species that live longer than that, but he's supposed to be human."

 Winter shrugged. "There are always exceptions to a race's normal life span," she pointed out. "And a Jedi, in particular might have techniques that would help extend that span."

 Luke thought about that. It was possible, he knew. Yoda had certainly had a long lifea good nine hundred yearsand as a general rule, smaller species usually had shorter life spans than larger ones. Butusually didn't meanalways; and after many hours of records searches, Luke still hadn't figured out just what species Yoda had belonged to. Perhaps a better approach might be to try to find out how long the Emperor had lived.

 "So you think Jorus C'baoth is alive?" Winter asked into his thoughts.

 Luke glanced around. They'd reached the Grand Corridor now, which because of its location was usually fairly brimming with beings of all sorts. But today it was nearly empty, with only a few humans and others standing around in little conversation groups of their own, all of them too far away to eavesdrop. "I had a brief mental contact with another Jedi while I was on Nidlon," he said, lowering his voice. "Afterward, Leia told me that there were rumors C'baoth had been seen on Jomark. I don't know what other conclusion to come to."

 Winter was silent. "Any comments?" Luke prompted her.

 She shrugged. "Anything having to do with Jedi and the Force are out of my personal experience, Commander," she said. "I really can't comment one way or another on that. But I'd have to say that the impression I got of C'baoth from Alderaanian history makes me skeptical."

 "Why?"

 "It's just an impression, you understand," Winter emphasized. "Nothing I would even have mentioned if you hadn't asked. C'baoth struck me as the sort of person who loved being in the middle of things. The sort who, if he couldn't lead, control, or help in a particular situation, would still be there just so he'd be visible."

 They were passing by one of the purple-and-green ch'hala trees lining the Grand Corridor now, close enough for Luke to see the subtle moire like turmoil of color taking place beneath the thin transparent outer bark. "I suppose that fits with what I read," he conceded, reaching out to slide a fingertip across the slender tree trunk as they walked. The subtle turmoil exploded at his touch into a flash of angry red across the quiet purple, the color shooting out around the trunk like ripples in a cylindrical pond, circling it again and again as it flowed up and down the trunk before finally fading to burgundy and then back to purple again. "I don't know if you knew it, but he apparently promoted himself from Jedi Knight to Jedi Master. Seems like kind of a conceited thing to do."

 "Yes, it does," Winter agreed. "Though at least by the time he came to Alderaan there didn't seem to be any dispute about it. My point is that someone who likes the spotlight that much wouldn't have stayed so completely out of the war against the Empire."

 "And a good point it is, too," Luke admitted, half trying to watch the last bit of red fade away on the ch'hala tree he'd touched. The Nkllon contact with the mysterious Jedi had been like that: there for a short time, and then gone without a trace. Was C'baoth perhaps no longer fully in control of his powers? "New subject, then. What do you know about this Outbound Flight project the Old Republic put together?"

 "Not much," she said, frowning with concentration. "It was supposedly an attempt to search for life outside the galaxy proper, but the whole thing was so buried in secrecy they never released any details. I'm not even sure whether or not it was ever launched."

 "The records say it was," Luke said, touching the next ch'hala tree in line as they passed by, eliciting another flash of red. "They also say that C'baoth was attached to the project. Does that mean he would have been aboard?"

 "I don't know," Winter said. "There were rumors that several Jedi Masters would be going along, but again there was no official confirmation of that." She looked sideways at him. "Are you thinking that might be why he wasn't around during the Rebellion?"

 "It's possible," Luke said. "Of course, that would just raise another whole set of questions. Like what happened to them and how he got back."

 Winter shrugged. "I suppose there's one way to find out."

 "Yeah." Luke touched the last tree in line. "Go to Jomark and ask him. I guess I'll have to."

 Leia's office was grouped with the other Inner Council suites just off the cross hallway that linked the Grand Corridor with the more intimate Inner Council meeting room. Luke and Winter entered the outer reception area, to find a familiar figure waiting there. "Hello, Threepio," Luke said.

 "Master Lukehow good to see you again," the gold-skinned droid gushed. "I trust you're well?"

 "I'm fine," Luke told him. "Artoo said to say hello when I saw you, by the way. They've got him over at the spaceport helping with some maintenance on my X-wing, but I'll be bringing him back later this evening. You can see him then."

 "Thank you, sir." Threepio tilted his head slightly, as if suddenly remembering that he was supposed to be acting as a receptionist here. "Princess Leia and the others are expecting you," he said, touching the inner chamber release. "Please go on in."

 "Thank you," Luke said, nodding gravely. No matter how ridiculous Threepio might look in any given situation, there was always a certain inherent dignity about him, a dignity that Luke usually tried to respond to in kind. "Let us know if anyone else comes."

 "Of course, sir," Threepio said.

 They went into the inner chamber to find Leia and Han holding a quiet conversation over a computer display on Leia's desk. Chewbacca, sitting alone near the door with his bowcaster across his knees, growled a greeting as they entered.

 "AhLuke," Leia said, looking up. "Thanks for coming." She shifted her attention to Winter. "That'll be all for now, Winter."

 "Yes, Your Highness," Winter nodded. With her usual grace, she glided from the room.

 Luke looked at Han. "I hear you dropped a double size thermal detonator on the Council yesterday."

 Han grimaced. "I tried. Not that anyone really believed me."

 "One of those instances where politics drifts off into the realm of wishful thinking," Leia said. "The last thing anyone wants to believe is that in our sweep we somehow missed one of the Emperor's Grand Admirals."

 "Sounds more like willful denial than wishful thinking to me," Luke said. "Or do they have another theory as to how we got edged so neatly into that Sluis Van trap?"

 Leia grimaced. "Some of them say that's where Ackbar's collusion comes in.

 "Ah," Luke murmured. Sothat was the thrust of Fey'lya's scheme." "I hadn't heard any of the details yet."

 "So far, Fey'lya's been playing the sabacc cards close to the fur," Han growled. "Heclaims he's trying to be fair; I think he's just trying not to rock all the stabilizers at once.

 Luke frowned at him. There was something else in his friend's face and sense "And maybe something more?" he prompted.

 Han and Leia exchanged glances. "Maybe," Han said. "You notice how quickly after the Sluis Van attack Fey'lya dropped the hammer on Ackbar. Either he's one of the great opportunists of all time"

 "Which we already know he is," Leia put in.

 "or else," Han continued grimly, "he knew in advance what was going to happen."

 Luke looked at Leia. At the strain in her face and sense "You realize what you're saying," he said quietly. "You're accusing a member of the Council of being an Imperial agent."

 Leia's sense seemed to flinch. Han's didn't even flicker. "Yeah, I know," Han said. "Isn't that what he's accusing Ackbar of?"

 "The problem is timing, Han," Leia said, her tone one of strained patience. "As I've already tried to explain. If we accuse Fey'lya of anything now, it'll just look like we're trying to take the pressure off Ackbar by turning Fey'lya's charges back against him. Even if it were trueand I don't think it isit would still come across as a cheap and rather mindless trick."

 "Maybe that's why he was so quick to finger Ackbar in the first place," Han countered. "So that we couldn't turn it back on him. That ever occur to you?"

 "Yes, it has," Leia said. "Unfortunately, it doesn't change the situation. Until we've cleared Ackbar, we can't go making accusations against Fey'lya."

 Han snorted. "Come on, Leia. Political waddlefooting is fine in its place, but we're talking about the survival of the New Republic here."

 "Which could fall completely apart over this without anyone ever firing a shot," Leia retorted hotly. "Face it, Hanthis whole thing is still being held together with hope and crating tape. You get a few wild accusations flying around, and half the races in the old Rebel Alliance might decide to pull out and go their separate ways."

 Luke cleared his throat. "If I can say something?"

 They looked at him, the tension in the room fading a little. "Sure, kid, what is it?" Han said.

 "I think we all agree that, whatever his agenda or possible sponsors Fey'lya up tosomething ," Luke said. "Maybe it would help to find out what that something is. Leia, what do we know about Fey'lya?"

 She shrugged. "He's a Bothan, obviously, though he grew up on the Bothan colony world of Kothlis instead of on Bothawni proper. He joined the real Alliance right after the Battle of Yavin, bringing a good-sized group of his followers Bothans in with him. His people served mainly in support and reconnaissance, though they saw some occasional action, too. He was involved in a number of wideranging interstellar business activities before joining the Allianceshipping, merchandising, some mining, assorted other ventures. I'm pretty sure he's kept up with some of them since then, but I don't know which ones."

 "Are they on file?" Luke asked.

 She shook her head. "I've been through his file five times, and I've checked every other reference to him I could find. Nothing."

 "That's where we want to start our backtrack, then," Han decided. "Quiet business stuff is always good for digging up dirt."

 Leia threw him a patient look. "It's a big galaxy, Han. We don't even know where to start looking."

 "I think we can figure it out," Han assured her. "You said the Bothans saw some action after Yavin. Where?"

 "Any number of places," Leia said, frowning. She swiveled the computer around to face her, tapped in a command. "Let's see"

 "You can skip any battle they were ordered into," Han told her. "Also any time there were only a few of them there as part of a big multispecies force. I just want the places where a bunch of Fey'lya's people really threw themselves into it."

 It was clear from Leia's face that she didn't see where Han was going with this, a sentiment Luke could readily identify with. But she fed in the parameters without comment. "WellI suppose the only one that really qualifies would be a short but violent battle off New Cov in the Churba sector. Four Bothan ships took on aVictory -class Star Destroyer that was snooping around, keeping it busy until a Star Cruiser could come to their assistance."

 "New Cov, huh?" Han repeated thoughtfully. "That system get mentioned anywhere in Fey'lya's business stuff?"

 "Uh no, it doesn't."

 "Fine," Han nodded. "Then that's where we start."

 Leia threw Luke a blank look. "Did I miss something?"

 "Oh, come on, Leia," Han said. "You said yourself that the Bothans pretty much sat out the real war everywhere they could. They didn't take on aVictory Star Destroyer at New Cov just for the fun of it. They were protecting something."

 Leia frowned. "I think you're reaching.

 "Maybe," Han agreed. "Maybe not. Suppose it was Fey'lya and not the Imperials that sneaked that money into Ackbar's account? Transferring a block fund through Palanhi from the Churba sector would be easier than sending it in from any of the Imperial systems."

 "That takes us back to accusing Fey'lya of being an Imperial agent," Luke warned.

 "Maybe not," Han argued. "Could be the timing of the transfer was coincidence. Or maybe one of the Bothans got a whiff of the Empire's intentions and Fey'lya figured he could use it to take down Ackbar."

 Leia shook her head. "It's still nothing we can take to the Council," she said.

 "I'm not going to take it to the Council," Han told her. "I'm going to take Luke, and we're going to go to New Cov and check it out ourselves. Quiet like."

 Leia looked at Luke, an unspoken question forming in her mind.

 "There's nothing I can do here to help," he said. "It's worth a look, anyway."

 "All right," Leia sighed. "But keep it quiet."

 Han gave her a tight grin. "Trust me." He raised an eyebrow at Luke. "You ready?"

 Luke blinked. "You mean right now?"

 "Sure, why not? Leia's got the political end covered here okay."

 There was a flicker of sense from Leia, and Luke looked over just in time to see her wince. Her eyes met Luke's, her sense pleading with him to keep quiet.What is it? he asked her silently.

 Whether she would have answered him or not he never found out. From over at the door Chewbacca growled out the whole story.

 Han turned to stare at his wife, his mouth falling open. "You promisedwhat ?" he breathed.

 She swallowed visibly. "Han, I had no choice."

 "No choice? Nochoice ? I'll give you a choiceno, you're not going."

 "Han"Excuse me," Luke interrupted, standing up. "I have to go check out my X-wing. I'll see you both later."

 "Sure, kid," Han growled, not looking at him.

 Luke stepped to the door, catching Chewbacca's eye as he passed and nodding toward the outer office. Clearly, the Wookiee had already come to the same conclusion. Heaving his massive bulk to his feet, he followed Luke from the room.

 

 The door slid shut behind them, and for a long moment they just stared at each other. Leia broke the silence first. "I have to go, Han," she said softly. "I promised Khabarakh I'd meet him. Don't you understand?"

 "No, I don't understand," Han retorted, trying hard to hold on to his temper. The gut-wrending fear he'd felt after that near-miss on Bpfassh was back, churning hard at his stomach. Fear for Leia's safety, and the safety of the twins she carried. His son and daughter "These whatever-they-ares"

 "Noghri," she supplied the word.

 "these Nogti have been taking potshots at you every chance they've had for a couple of months now. You remember Bpfassh and that mock-up of theFalcon they tried to sucker us into getting aboard? And the attack on Bimmisaari before thatthey came within a hair of snatching us right out of the middle of a marketplace. If it hadn't been for Luke and Chewie they'd have done it, too. These guys areserious , Leia. And now you tell me you want to fly out alone and visit their planet? You might as well turn yourself over to the Empire and save some time."

 "I wouldn't be going if I thought that," she insisted. "Khabarakh knows I'm Darth Vader's daughter, and for whatever reason, that seems to be very important to them. Maybe I can use that leverage to turn them away from the Empire and onto our side. Anyway, I have to try."

 Han snorted. "What is this, some kind of crazy Jedi thing? Luke was always getting all noble and charging off into trouble, too."

 Leia reached over to lay her hand on his arm. "Han I know it's a risk," she said quietly. "But it may be the only chance we ever have of resolving this. The Noghri need helpKhabarakh admitted that. If I can give them that hell if I can convince them to come over to our sidethat'll mean one less enemy for us to have to deal with." She hesitated. "And I can't keep running forever."

 "What about the twins?"

 He had the guilty satisfaction of seeing her wince. "I know," she said, a shiver running through her as she reached her other hand up to hold her belly. "But what's the alternative? To lock them away in a tower of the Palace somewhere with a ring of Wookiee guards around them? They'll never have any chance of a normal life as long as the Noghri are trying to take them from us."

 Han gritted his teeth. So she knew. He hadn't been sure before, but he was now. Leia knew that what the Empire had been after this whole time was her unborn children.

 And knowing that, she still wanted to meet with the Empire's agents.

 For a long minute he gazed at her, his eyes searching the features of that face he'd grown to love so deeply over the years, his memory bringing up images of the past as he did so. The young determination in her face as, in the middle of a blazing firelight, she'd grabbed Luke's blaster rifle away from him and shot them an escape route into the Death Star's detention-level garbage chute. The sound of her voice in the middle of deadly danger at Jabba's, helping him through the blindness and tremor and disorientation of hibernation sickness. The wiser, more mature determination visible through the pain in her eyes as, lying wounded outside the Endor bunker, she had nevertheless summoned the skill and control to coolly shoot two stormtroopers off Han's back.

 And he remembered, too, the wrenching realization he'd had at that same time: that no matter how much he tried, he would never be able to totally protect her from the dangers and risks of the universe. Because no matter how much he might love herno matter how much he might give of himself to hershe could never be content with that alone. Her vision extended beyond him, just as it extended beyond herself, to all the beings of the galaxy.

 And to take that away from her, whether by force or even by persuasion, would be to diminish her soul. And to take away part of what he'd fallen in love with in the first place.

 "Can I at least go with you?" he asked quietly.

 She reached up to caress his cheek, smiling her thanks through the sudden moisture in her eyes. "I promised I'd go alone," she whispered, her voice tight with emotion. "Don't worry, I'll be all right."

 "Sure." Abruptly, Han got to his feet. "Well, if you're going, you're going. Come onI'll help you get theFalcon prepped."

 "TheFalcon ?" she repeated. "But I thought you were going to New Cov."

 "I'll take Lando's ship," he called over his shoulder as he strode to the door. "I've got to get it back to him, anyway.

 "But"

 "No argument," he cut her off. "If this Noghri of yours has something besides talking in mind, you'll stand a better chance in theFalcon than you will in theLady Luck ." He opened the door and stepped into the reception area.

 And stopped short. Standing directly between him and the door, looking for all the world like a giant hairy thundercloud, Chewbacca was glowering at him. "What?" Han demanded.

 The Wookiee's comment was short, sharp, and very much to the point. "Well,I don't much like it, either," Han told him bluntly. "What do you want me to do, lock her up somewhere?"

 He felt Leia come up behind him. "I'll be all right, Chewie," she assured him. "Really I will."

 Chewbacca growled again, making it abundantly clear what he thought of her assessment. "You got any suggestions, let's hear 'em," Han said.

 Not surprisingly, he did. "Chewie, I'm sorry," Leia said. "I promised Khabarakh I'd come alone."

 Chewbacca shook his head violently, showing his teeth as he growled his opinion of that idea. "He doesn't like it," Han translated diplomatically.

 "I got the gist, thank you," Leia retorted. "Listen, you two; for the last time"

 Chewbacca cut her off with a bellow that made her jump half a meter backward. "You know, sweetheart," Han said, "I really think you ought to let him go with you. At least as far as the rendezvous point," he added quickly as she threw him a glare. "Come onyou know how seriously Wookiees take this life debt thing. You need a pilot, anyway.

 For just a second he could see the obvious counter argument in her eyes: that she was perfectly capable of flying theFalcon herself. But only for a second. "All right," she sighed. "I guess Khabarakh won't object to that. But once we reach the rendezvous, Chewie, you do as I tell you, whether you like it or not. Agreed?"

 The Wookiee thought about it, rumbled agreement. "Okay," Leia said, sounding relieved. "Let's get going, then. Threepio?"

 "Yes, Your Highness?" the droid said hesitantly. For once, he'd had the brains to sit quietly at the reception desk and keep his loose change out of the discussion. It was a marked improvement over his usual behavior, Han decided. Maybe he ought to let Chewbacca get angry more often.

 "I want you to come with me, too," Leia told the droid. "Khabarakh spoke Basic well enough, but the other Noghri may not, and I don't want to have to depend on their translators to make myself understood."

 "Of course, Your Highness," Threepio said, tilting his head slightly to the side.

 "Good." Leia turned to look up at Han, licked her lips. "I guess we'd better get going."

 There were a million things he could have said to her. A million things he wanted to say. "I guess," he said instead, "you'd better."

 

 CHAPTER
5

 "You'll forgive me," Mara said conversationally as she finished the last bit of wiring on her comm board, "if I say that as a hideout, this place stinks."

 Karrde shrugged as he hefted a sensor pack out of its box and set it down on the side table with an assortment of other equipment. "I agree it's not Myrkr," he said. "On the other hand, it has its compensations. Who'd ever think of looking for a smuggler's nest in the middle of a swamp?"

 "I'm not referring to the ship drop," Mara told him, reaching beneath her loose-flowing tunic sleeve to readjust the tiny blaster sheathed to her left forearm. "I meanthis place."

 "Ah.This place." Karrde glanced out the window. "I don't know. A bit public, perhaps, but that, too, has its compensations."

 "A little public?" Mara echoed, looking out the window herself at the neat row of cream-white buildings barely five meters away and the crowds of brightly clad humans and aliens hurrying along just outside. "You call this a liulc public?"

 "Calm down, Mara," Karrde said. "When the only viable places to live on a planet are a handful of deep valleys, of course things are going to get a bit crowded. The people here are used to it, and they've learned how to give each other a reasonable degree of privacy. Anyway, even if they wanted to snoop, it wouldn't do them much good."

 "Mirror glass won't stop a good sensor probe," Mara countered. "And crowds mean cover for Imperial spies."

 "The Imperials have no idea where we are. He paused and threw her an odd look. "Unless you know differently."

 Mara turned away. So that was how it was going to be this time. Previous employers had reacted to her strange hunches with fear, or anger, or simple bald-faced hatred. Karrde, apparently, was going to go for polite exploitation. "I can't turn it on and off like a sensor pack," she growled over her shoulder. "Not anymore.

 "Ah," Karrde said. The word implied he understood; the tone indicated otherwise. "Interesting. Is this a remnant of some previous Jedi training?"

 She turned to look at him. "Tell me about the ships."

 He frowned. "Excuse me?"

 "The ships," she repeated. "The capital warships that you were very careful not to tell Grand Admiral Thrawn about, back when he visited us on Myrkr. You promised to give me the details later. This is later."

 He studied her, a slight smile creasing his lips. "All right," he said. "Have you ever heard of theKatana fleet?"

 She had to search her memory. "That was the group also called the Dark Force, wasn't it? Something like two hundred Dreadnaught-class Heavy Cruisers that were lost about ten years before the Clone Wars broke out. All the ships were fitted with some kind of new-style full-rig slave circuitry, and when the system malfunctioned, the whole fleet jumped to lightspeed together and disappeared."

 "Nearly right," Karrde said. "The Dreadnaughts of that era in particular were ridiculously crew-intensive ships, requiring upwards of sixteen thousand men each. The full-rig slave circuitry on theKatana ships cut that complement down to around two thousand."

 Mara thought about the handful of Dreadnaught cruisers she'd known. "Must have been an expensive conversion."

 "It was," Karrde nodded. "Particularly since they played it as much for public relations as they did for pure military purposes. They redesigned the entire Dreadnaught interior for the occasion, from the equipment and interior decor right down to the dark gray hull surfacing. That last was the origin of the nickname 'Dark Force," incidentally, though there was some suggestion that it referred to the smaller number of interior lights a two-thousand-crewer ship would need. At any rate, it was the Old Republic's grand demonstration of how effective a slave-rigged fleet could be."

 Mara snorted. "Some demonstration."

 "Agreed," Karrde said dryly. "But the problem wasn't in the slave circuitry itself. The records are a little vaguesuppressed by those in charge at the time, no doubtbut it appears that one or more of the fleet's crewers picked up a hive virus at one of the ports of call on their maiden voyage. It was spread throughout all two hundred ships while in dormant state, which meant that when it suddenly flared up it took down nearly everybody at once."

 Mara shivered. She'd heard of hive viruses leveling whole planetary populations in pre-Clone Wars days, before the medical science of the Old Republic and later the Empire had finally figured out how to deal with the things. "So it killed the crews before they could get to help."

 "Apparently in a matter of hours, though that's just an educated guess," Karrde said. "What turned the whole thing from a disaster into a debacle was the fact that this particular hive virus had the charming trait of driving its victims insane just before it killed them. The dying crewers lasted just long enough to slave their ships together which meant that when theKatana command crew also went crazy and took off the entire fleet went with them."

 "I remember now," Mara nodded slowly. "That was supposedly what started the big movement toward decentralization in automated ship functions. Away from big, all-powerful computers into hundreds of droids."

 "The movement was already on its way, but theKatana fiasco pretty well sealed the outcome," Karrde said. "Anyway, the fleet disappeared somewhere into the depths of interstellar space and was never heard from again. It was a big news item for a while, with some of the less reverent members of the media making snide wordplays on the 'Dark Force' name, and for a few years it was considered a hot prospect by salvage teams who had more enthusiasm than good sense. Once it finally dawned on them just how much empty space was available in the galaxy to lose a couple hundred ships in, the flurry of interest ended. At any rate, the Old Republic soon had bigger problems on its hands. Aside from the occasional con artist who'll try to sell you a map of its location, you never hear about the fleet anymore."

 "Right." It was, of course, obvious now where Karrde was going with this. "So how did you happen to find it?"

 "Purely by accident, I assure you. In fact, it wasn't until several days afterward that I realized what exactly I'd found. I suspect none of the rest of the crew ever knew at all."

 Karrde's gaze defocused, his eyes flattening with the memory. "It was just over fifteen years ago," he said, his voice distant, the thumbs of his intertwined hands rubbing slowly against each other. "I was working as navigator/sensor specialist for a small, independent smuggling group. We'd rather botched a pickup and had had to shoot our way past a pair of Carrack cruisers on our way out. We made it all right, but since I hadn't had the time to do a complete lightspeed calculation, we dropped back to realspace a half light-year out to recalculate." His lip twitched. "Imagine our surprise when we discovered a pair of Dreadnaughts waiting directly in our path."

 "Lying dead in space.

 Karrde shook his head. "Actually, they weren't, which was what threw me for those first few days. From all appearances, the ships seemed to be fully functional, with both interior and running lights showing and even a standby sensor scan in operation. Naturally, we assumed it was part of the group we'd just tangled with, and the captain made an emergency jump to lightspeed to get us out of there."

 "Not a good idea," Mara murmured.

 "It seemed the lesser of two evils at the time," Karrde said grimly. "As it turned out, we came close to being fatally wrong on that account. The ship hit the mass shadow of a large comet on the way out, blowing the main hyperdrive and nearly wrecking the rest of the ship on the spot. Five of our crew were killed in the collision, and another three died of injuries before we could limp back to civilization on the backup hyperdrive."

 There was a moment of silence. "How many of you were left?" Mara asked at last.

 Karrde focused on her, his usual sardonic smile back on his face. "Or in other words, who else might know about the fleet?"

 "If you want to put it that way.

 "There were six of us left. As I said, though, I don't think any of the others realized what it was we'd found. It was only when I went back to the sensor records and discovered that there were considerably more than just the two Dreadnaughts in the area that I began to have my own suspicions."

 "And the records themselves?"

 "I erased them. After memorizing the coordinates, of course."

 Mara nodded. "You said this was fifteen years ago?"

 "That's right," Karrde nodded back. "I've thought about going back and doing something with the ships, but I never had the time to do it properly. Unloading two hundred Dreadnaughts on the open market isn't something you rush into without a good deal of prior preparation. Even if you have markets for all of them, which has always been problematic."

 "Until now."

 He cocked an eyebrow. "Are you suggesting I sell them to the Empire?"

 "They're in the market for capital ships,"' she reminded him.

 "And they're offering value plus twenty percent."

 He cocked an eyebrow at her. "I thought you didn't much care for the Empire."

 "I don't," she retorted. "What's the other option give them to the New Republic?"

 He held her gaze. "That might be more profitable in the long run.

 Mara's left hand curled into a tight fist, her stomach churning with mixed feelings. To let the Dreadnaughts fall into the hands of the New Republic, successor to the Rebel Alliance that had destroyed her life, was a hateful thought. But on the other hand, the Empire without the Emperor was only a pale shadow of its former self, hardly even worthy of the name anymore. It would be pearls before swine to give the Dark Force to them.

 Or would it? With a Grand Admiral in charge of the Imperial Fleet again, perhaps there was now a chance for the Empire to gain some of its old glory. And if there was"What are you going to do?" she asked Karrde.

 "At the moment, nothing," Karrde said. "It's the same problem we faced with Skywalker, after all: the Empire will be swifter to exact vengeance if we go against them, but the New Republic looks more likely to win in the end. Giving Thrawn theKatana fleet would only delay the inevitable. The most prudent course right now is to stay neutral."

 "Except that giving Thrawn the Dreadnaughts might get him off our exhaust trail," Mara pointed out. "That would be worth the trade right there."

 Karrde smiled faintly. "Oh, come now, Mara. The Grand Admiral may be a tactical genius, but he's hardly omniscient. He can't possibly have any idea where we are. And he certainly has more important things to do than spend his resources chasing us down."

 "I'm sure he does," Mara agreed reluctantly. But she couldn't help remembering how, even at the height of his power and with a thousand other concerns, the Emperor had still frequently taken the time to exact vengeance on someone who'd crossed him.

 Beside her the comm board buzzed, and Mara reached over to key the channel. "Yes?"

 "Lachton," a familiar voice came from the speaker. "Is Karrde around?"

 "Right here," Karrde called, stepping to Mara's side.

 "How's the camouflage work going?"

 "We're about done," Lachton said. "We ran short of flash-netting, though. Do we have any more?"

 "There's some at one of the dumps," Karrde told him.

 "I'll send Mara to get it; can you have someone come in to pick it up?"

 "Sure, no problem. I'll send Dankinhe hasn't got much to do at the moment anyway.

 "All right. The netting will be ready by the time he gets here."

 Karrde gestured, and Mara keyed off the channel.

 "You know where the Number Three dump is?" he asked her.

 She nodded. "Four twelve Wozwashi Street. Three blocks west and two north."

 "Right." He peered out the window. "Unfortunately, it's still too early for repulsorlift vehicles to be on the streets. You'll have to walk."

 "That's all right," Mara assured him. She felt like a little exercise, anyway. "Two boxes be enough?"

 "If you can handle that many," he told her, looking her up and down as if making sure her outfit conformed to local Rishi standards of propriety. He needn't have bothered; one of the first rules the Emperor had drummed into her so long ago was to blend in as best she could with her surroundings. "If not, Lachton can probally make do with one."

 "All right. I'll see you later."

 Their townhouse was part of a row of similar structures abutting one of the hundreds of little market areas that dotted the whole congested valley. For a moment Mara stood in the entry alcove of their building, out of the busy flow of pedestrian traffic, and looked around her. Through the gaps between the nearest buildings she could see the more distant parts of the city-vale, most of it composed of the same cream-white stone so favored by the locals. In places, she could see all the way to the edge, a few small buildings perched precariously partway up the craggy mountains that rose sharply into the sky on all sides. Far up those mountains, she knew, lived loose avian tribes of native Rishi, who no doubt looked down in bemused disbelief at the strange creatures who had chosen the most uncomfortably hot and humid spots of their planet in which to live.

 Dropping her gaze from the mountains, Mara gave the immediate area a quick scan. Across the street were more townhouses; between her and them was the usual flow of brightly clad pedestrians hurrying to and from the market area to the east. Reflexively, her eyes flicked across the townhouses, though with each window composed of mirror glass there wasn't a lot there for her to see. Also reflexively, she glanced across each of the narrow pedestrian alleyways between the buildings.

 Between two of them, back at the building's rear where he was hardly visible, was the motionless figure of a man wearing a blue scarf and patterned green tunic.

 Staring in her direction.

 Mara let her gaze drift on as if she hadn't seen him, her heart thudding suddenly in her throat. Stepping out of the alcove, she turned east toward the market and joined the flow of traffic.

 She didn't stay with it long, though. As soon as she was out of the mysterious loiterer's line of sight, she began cutting her way across the flow, heading across the street toward the townhouse window. She reached it three buildings d,own from the loiterer, ducked into the alleyway, and hurried toward the rear. If he was indeed monitoring Karrde's place, there was a good chance she could take him from behind.

 She reached "The rear of the buildings and circled around only to find that her quarry had vanished.

 For a moment she stood there, looking around her for any sign of the man's whereabouts, wondering what to do now. There was none of the insistent tingling that had gotten them away from Myrkr at the last second; but as she'd told Karrde, it wasn't a talent she could turn on and off.

 She looked down at the ground where the man had been standing. There were a few faint footprints in the thin coating of dust that had collected at the corner of the townhouse, giving the impression that the man had been there long enough to shuffle his feet a few times. A half dozen steps away, right in the center of another layer of dust, was a clear footprint pointing toward the west behind the row of townhouses.

 Mara looked in that direction, feeling her lip twist. A deliberate lead-on, obviously-footprints in dust never came out that clear and unsmudged unless carefully planted. And she was right. A hundred meters directly ahead, strolling casually along the rear of the buildings toward a north-south street, was the man in the blue scarf and patterned tunic. A not-very-subtle invitation to follow him.

 Okay, friend,she thought as she started off after him.You want to play? Let's play.

 She had closed the gap between them to perhaps ninety meters when he reached the cross flow of traffic and turned north into it. Another clear invitation, this time to close the gap further lest she lose him.

 But Mara had no intention of taking him up on this one. She'd memorized the geography of the city-vale their first day here, and it was pretty obvious that his intention was to lead her up to the more sparsely populated industrial areas to the north, where presumably he could deal with her without the awkward presence of witnesses. If she could get there first, she might be able to turn things around on him. Double-checking the blaster beneath her left sleeve, she cut through an alley between the buildings to her right and headed north.

 The valley stretched for nearly a hundred fifty kilometers in a roughly east-west direction, but at this point its north-south dimension was only a few kilometers. Mara kept up her pace, continually revising her course to avoid crowds and other impediments. Gradually, the houses and shops began to give way to light industry; and, finally, she judged she'd come far enough. If her quarry had kept with the leisurely pace of a man who didn't want to lose a tracker, she should now have enough time to prepare a little reception for him.

 There was, of course, always the possibility that he'd shifted to one of the other north-south streets somewhere along the way, changed direction east or west, or even doubled back completely and returned to Karrde's townhouse. But as she looked carefully around the corner of a building into the street he'd first turned onto, she discovered that his imagination was as limited as his surveillance technique. Halfway down the block, he was crouched motionless behind a row of storage barrels with his back to her, his blue scarf thrown back out of the way across his patterned green tunic, something that was probably a weapon clutched ready in his hand. Waiting, no doubt, for her to stroll into his trap. Amateur, she thought, lip twisting in contempt. Watching him closely, not even bothering with her blaster, she eased around the corner and started silently toward him.

 "That's far enough," a mocking voice said from behind her.

 Mara froze. The figure crouched by the barrels ahead of her didn't even twitch and it was only then that she belatedly realized that it was far too still to be simply waiting in ambush. Far too still, for that matter, to even be alive.

 Slowly, keeping her arms stretched straight out to her sides, she turned around. The man facing her was of medium height, with a somewhat bulky build and dark, brooding eyes. His undertunic hung open to reveal a lightarmor vest beneath it. In his hand, of course, was a blaster. "Well, well, well," he sneered. "What we got here? `Bout time you showed up was startin' to think you'd gotten lost or somethin'"

 "Who are you?" Mara asked.

 "Oh, no, Red, I'm the one what's askin' the questions here. Not that I need to, `course. That fancy stuff on top pret' well tells me aw I need t' know." He gestured with his blaster at her red-gold hair. "Shoulda gotten rid o' thathide it or dyed it, y'know. Dead give'way. Pardon the `spression."

 Mara took a careful breath, forcing her muscles to unknot. "What do you want with me?" she asked, keeping her voice calm.

 "Same thin' every man really wants," he grinned slyly. "A pile o' hard cold cash."

 She shook her head. "In that case, I'm afraid you've picked the wrong person. I've only got about fifty on me."

 He grinned even wider. "Cute, Red, but you're wastin' your time. I know who y'are, aw right. You 'n' your pals are gonna make me real rich. C'monlet's go."

 Mara didn't move. "Perhaps we can work a deal," she suggested, feeling a drop of sweat trickle down between her shoulder blades. She knew better than to be fooled by the other's careless speech and mannerwhoever and whatever he was, he knew exactly what he was doing.

 On the plus side, she still had the blaster hidden beneath her sleeve; and she would give long odds that her assailant wouldn't expect that a weapon that potent might be small enough to conceal there. The fact that he hadn't already searched her seemed to confirm that assessment.

 But whatever she was going to do, she had to do it now, while she was still facing him. Unfortunately, with her hands spread apart there was no way for her to get at her weapon without telegraphing the movement. Somehow, she needed to distract him.

 "A deal, huh?" he asked lazily. "What kind o' deal you got in mind?"

 "What kind of deal do you want?" she countered. If there'd been a box anywhere near her feet, she might have been able to scoop it up with her foot and throw it at him. But though there was a fair amount of junk littering the street in this part of town, nothing suitable was within reach. Her half-boots were firmly fastened around her ankles, impossible to get loose without him noticing. Rapidly, she ran through an inventory of items she was carrying or wearingnothing.

 But the Emperor's intensive training had included direct manipulation of the Force as well as the long-range communication abilities that had been her primary value to his regime. Those skills had vanished at the moment of his death, reappearing only briefly and erratically in the years since then.

 But if the sensory tingles and hunches had started again, perhaps the power was back, too

 "I'm sure we can double whatever you've been offered," she said. "Maybe even throw in something extra to sweeten the pot."

 His grin turned evil. "That's a real generous offer, Red. Real generous. Lotta men'd jump on that right away, sure `nough. Me"he lifted the blaster a little higher"I like stayin' with a sure thing."

 "Even if it means settling for half the money?" Two meters behind him, piled carelessly up against a retaining wall, was a small stack of scrap metal parts waiting to be picked up. A short length of shield tubing, in particular, seemed to he rather precariously positioned on one edge of a battered power cell case.

 Setting her teeth, clearing her thoughts as best she could, Mara reached her mind out toward the tubing.

 "On my pad, half a sure thing's better than twice o' nothin'," the man said. "Anyway, I don't 'spect you can outbid the Empire."

 Mara swallowed. She'd suspected it from the first; but the confirmation still sent a shiver up her back. "You might be surprised at our resources, she said. The length of tubing twitched, rolled a couple of millimeters

 "Now, don't think so," the other said easily. "C'mon, let's go."

 Mara tilted a finger back toward the dead man crouched at the box behind her. "You mind telling me first what happened here?"

 Her assailant shrugged. "What's t' tell? I needed a decoy; he was wandering' around the wrong place at the wrong time. End o' story." His grin suddenly vanished. "Enough stalling Turn around and start walkingunless you're looking' to spite me by making me settle for the death fee instead."

 "No," Mara murmured. She took a deep breath, straining with every bit of strength she possessed, knowing that this was her last best chance

 And behind her captor, the tubing fell with a muffled clank onto the ground.

 He was good, all right. The tubing had hardly even finished its fall before he'd dropped to one knee, spinning around and spraying the area behind him with a splattering of quick cover fire as he searched for whoever was sneaking up on him. It took less than a second for him to recognize his mistake, and with another spray of blaster fire he spun back again.

 But one second was all Mara needed. His desperate blaster spray was still tracking toward her when she shot him neatly in the head.

 For a long moment she just stood there, breathing hard, muscles trembling with reaction. Then, glancing around to make sure no one was running to see what all the commotion was about, she holstered her weapon and knelt down beside him.

 There was, as she'd expected, precious little to find. An IDprobably forgedgiving his name as Dengar Roth, a couple of spare power clips for his blaster, a backnp vibroblade knife, a data card and data pad, and some working capital in both local and Imperial currency. Stuffing the ID and data card into her tunic, she left the money and weapons where they were and got back to her feet. "There's your twice of nothing," she muttered, looking down at the body. "Enjoy it."

 Her eyes shifted to the piece of shield tubing that had saved her life. She'd been right. The twitches of power, as well as the hunches, were back. Which meant the dreams wouldn't be far behind.

 She swore under her breath. If they came, they came, and there was nothing much she could do except endure them. For the moment she had other, more pressing matters to deal with. Taking one final look around, she headed for home.

 

 Karrde and Dankin were waiting when she arrived back at the townhouse, the latter all but pacing the floor in his nervousness. "Thereyou are," he snapped as she slipped in through the back door. "Where the blazes?"

 "We've got trouble," Mara cut him off, handing the Dengar Roth ID to Karrde and brushing past them to the still largely disassembled communications room. Pushing aside a box of cables, she found a data pad and plugged in the card.

 "What kind of trouble?" Karrde asked, coming up behind her.

 "The bounty hunter kind," Mara said, handing him the data pad. Neatly framed in the center of the display, under a large 20,000, was Karrde's face. "We're probably all in there," she told him. "Or at least as many as grand Admiral Thrawn knew about."

 "So I'm worth twenty thousand now," Karrde murmured, paging quickly through the card. "I'm flattered."

 "Is that all you're going to say?" Mara demanded.

 He looked at her. "What would you like me to say?" he asked mildly. "That you were right and I was wrong about the Empire's interest in us?"

 "I'm not interested in laying blame," she told him stiffly. "What I want to know is what we're going to do about it."

 Karrde looked at the data pad again, a muscle tightening briefly in his jaw. "We're going to do the only prudent thing," he said. "Namely, retreat. Dankin, get on the secure comm and tell Lachton to start pulling the drop apart again. Then call Chin and his team and have them go over and repack the stuff in the equipment dumps. You can stay and help Mara and me here. I want to get off Rishi by midnight if at all possible."

 "Got it," Dankin said, already keying the encrypt codes into the comm board.

 Karrde handed the data pad back to Mara. "We'd better get busy."

 She stopped him with a hand on his arm. `And what happens when we run out of backnp bases?"

 He locked eyes with her. "We don't give up the Dreadnaughts under duress," he said, lowering his voice to just above a whisper. "Not to Thrawn; not to anyone else."

 "We may have to," she pointed out.

 His eyes hardened. "We may choose to," he corrected her. "We will never have to. Is that clear?"

 Mara grimaced to herself. "Yes."

 "Good." Karrde flicked a glance over her shoulder to where Dankin was speaking urgently into the comm. "We have a lot of work to do. Let's get to it."

 

 Mara would have bet that they couldn't reassemble their equipment in less than twenty-four hours. To her mild surprise, the crews had everything packed and ready to go barely an hour after local midnight. With suitably generous applications of funds to spaceport officials, they were off Rishi and to lightspeed an hour after that.

 And later that night, as theWild Karrde drove through the mottled sky of hyperspace, the dreams started again.

 

 CHAPTER
6

 From a distance it had looked like a standard-issue Bulk Cruiser: old, slow, minimally armed, with very little going for it in a fight except its size. But as with so very much of warfare, appearances in this case turned out to be deceiving; and if Grand Admiral Thrawn hadn't been on theChimaera 's bridge, Pellaeon had to admit that he might have been caught a bit by surprise.

 But Thrawn had been on the bridge, and had recognized immediately the unlikelihood that the Rebellion's strategists would have put such an important convoy under the protection of such a weak ship. And so, when the Bulk Cruiser's bays suddenly erupted with three full squadrons of A-wing starfighters, theChimaera 's TIE interceptors were already in space and swarming to the attack.

 "Interesting tactic," Thrawn commented as the gap between theChimaera and the Rebel convoy began to sparkle with laser flashes. "If not especially innovative. The idea of converting Bulk Cruisers to starfighter carriers was first proposed over twenty years ago."

 "I don't recall it ever being implemented," Pellaeon said, feeling a twinge of uneasiness as he eyed the tactical displays. A-wings were faster even than those cursed X-wings, and he wasn't at all sure how well his TIE interceptors would handle them.

 "Excellent fighters, A-wings," Thrawn said, as if reading Pellaeon's thoughts. "Not without their limitations, though. Particularly herehigh-speed craft like that are far more suited to hit-and-fade operations than to escort duty. Forcing them to remain near a convoy largely neutralizes their speed advantage." He cocked a blue-black eyebrow at Pellaeon. "Perhaps we're seeing the result of Admiral Ackbar's removal as Supreme Commander."

 "Perhaps." The TIE interceptors did indeed seem to be holding their own against the A-wings; and theChimaera itself was certainly having no trouble with the Bulk Cruiser. Beyond the battlefront, the rest of the convoy was trying to huddle together, as if that would do them any good. "Ackbar's people are still in charge, though."

 "Obviously."

 "We've been over this territory already, Captain," Thrawn said, his voice cooling slightly. "Planting a vacuum-tight collection of evidence against Ackbar would have ruined him far too quickly. The more subtle attack will still neutralize him, but it will also send ripples of uncertainty and confusion through the Rebellion's entire political system. At the very least, it will distract and weaken them just at the moment when we'll be launching the Mount Tantiss campaign. At its best, it could split the entire alliance apart." He smiled. "Ackbar himself is replaceable, Captain. The delicate political balance the Rebellion has created for itself is not."

 "I understand all that, Admiral," Pellaeon growled. "My concern is with your assumption that that Bothan on the Council can be relied upon to push things so close to your theoretical breakup point.

 "Oh, he'll push, all right," Thrawn said, his smile turning sardonic as he gazed out at the battle blazing on around the enemy convoy. "I've spent many hours studying Bothan art, Captain, and I understand the species quite well. There's no doubt at all that Councilor Fey'lya will play his part beautifully. As beautifully as if we were pulling his strings directly."

 He tapped a key on his board. "Starboard batteries: one of the Frigates in the convoy is easing into attack position. Assume it's an armed backup and treat it accordingly. Squadrons A-2 and A-3, move to protect that flank until the Frigate has been neutralized."

 The batteries and TIE wing commander acknowledged, and some of the turbolaser fire began to track on the Frigate. "And what happens if Fey'lya wins?" Pellaeon persisted. "Quickly, I mean, before all this political confusion has a chance to set in. By your own analysis of the species, any Bothan who's risen as high as Fey'lya has would have to be highly intelligent."

 "Intelligent, yes, but not necessarily in any way that's dangerous to us," Thrawn said. "He'd have to be a survivor, certainly, but that kind of verbal skill doesn't necessarily translate into military competence." He shrugged. "Actually, a victory by Fey'lya would merely prolong the whole awkward situation for the enemy. Given the kind of support Fey'lya's been cultivating among the Rebellion military, the politicians would have to go through another polarizing struggle when they realized their mistake and tried to replace him."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, suppressing a sigh. It was the kind of tangled subtlety that he'd never really felt comfortable with. He just hoped the Grand Admiral was right about the potential gains; it would be a shame for Intelligence to have engineered such a brilliantly successful bank job and then not get anything of real value out of it.

 "Trust me, Captain," Thrawn said into his unspoken worries. "I dare say the wasting of political effort has already begun, in fact. Ackbar's staunchest allies would hardly have left Coruscant at this critical point unless they were desperately searching for evidence to clear him."

 Pellaeon frowned at him. "Are you saying that Solo and Organa Solo are headed for the Palanhi system?"

 "Solo only, I think," Thrawn corrected thoughtfully.

 "Organa Solo and the Wookiee are most likely still trying to find a place to hide from our Noghri. But Solo will be going to Palanhi, firmly convinced by Intelligence's electronic sleight-of-hand that the trail leads through that system. Which is why theDeath's Head is on its way there right now."

 "I see," Pellaeon murmured. He'd noticed that order on the daily log and had wondered why Thrawn was pulling one of their best Imperial Star Destroyers off battle duty. "I hope it will be equal to the task. Solo and Skywalker have both proved hard to trap in the past."

 "I don't believe Skywalker is going to Palanhi," Thrawn told him, his face settling into a somewhat sour expression. "Our esteemed Jedi Master apparently called it correctly. Skywalker has decided to pay a visit to Jomark."

 Pellaeon stared at him. "Are you sure, Admiral? I haven't seen anything from Intelligence to that effect."

 "The information wasn't from, Intelligence," Thrawn said. "It came from Delta Source.

 "Ah," Pellaeon said, feeling his own expression go a little sour. TheChimaera 's Intelligence section had been nagging him for months now to find out what exactly this Delta Source was that seemed to feed such clear and precise information to the Grand Admiral from the very heart of the Imperial Palace. So far all Thrawn would say was that Delta Source was firmly established and that the information gained through it should be treated as absolutely reliable.

 Intelligence hadn't even been able to figure out whether Delta Source was a person, a droid, or some exotic recording system that was somehow able to elude the Rebellion's hourly counter intelligence sweeps of the Palace. It irritated them no end; and Pellaeon had to admit he didn't much like being kept in the dark about it, either. But Thrawn had personally activated Delta Source, and long years of unwritten protocol in such matters gave him the right to keep the contact confidential if he chose. "I'm sure C'baoth will be pleased to hear it," he said. "I presume you'll want to give him the news yourself."

 He thought he'd hidden his irritation with C'baoth reasonably well. Apparently, he'd thought wrong. "You're still upset about Taanab," Thrawn said, turning to gaze out at the battle. It wasn't a question.

 "Yes, sir, I am," Pellaeon said stiffly. "I've been over the records again, and there's only one possible conclusion. C'baoth deliberately went beyond the battle plan Captain Aban had laid outwent beyond it to the point of disobeying a direct order. I don't care who C'baoth is or whether he felt justified or not. What he did constitutes mutiny."

 "It did indeed," Thrawn agreed calmly. "Shall I throw him out of the Imperial service altogether, or simply demote him in rank?

 Pellaeon glared at the other. "I'm serious, Admiral.

 "So am I, Captain," Thrawn countered, his voice abruptly cold. "You know full well what's at stake here. We need to utilize every weapon at our disposal if we're to defeat the Rebellion. C'baoth's ability to enhance coordination and battle efficiency between our forces is one of those weapons; and if he can't handle proper military discipline and protocol, then we bend the rules for him."

 "And what happens when we've bent the rules so far that they come around and stab us in the back?" Pellaeon demanded. "He ignored a direct order at Taanabmaybe next time it'll be two orders. Then three, then four, until finally he's doing what he damn well pleases and to blazes with the Empire. What's to stop him?"

 "Initially, the ysalamiri," Thrawn said, gesturing at the odd-looking tubular frameworks scattered around the bridge, each with an elongated furry creature wrapped around it. Each of them creating a bubble in the Force where none of C'baoth's Jedi tricks would work. "That's what they're here for, after all."

 "That's all well and good," Pellaeon said. "But in the long run"

 "In the long run,I will stop him," Thrawn cut him off, touching his board. "Squadron C-3, watch your port-zenith flank. There's a blister on that Frigate that could be a cluster trap."

 The commander acknowledged, the TIE interceptors veering away in response. A second later, half a heartbeat too late, the blister abruptly exploded, sending a withering hail of concussion grenades outward in all directions. The rearmost of the TIE interceptors was caught by the edge of the fiery flower, shattering in a brilliant secondary `explosion. The rest, out of range, escaped the booby trap unharmed.

 Thrawn turned his glowing eyes on Pellaeon. "I understand your concerns, Captain," he said quietly. "What you fail to graspwhat you've always failed to graspis that a man with C'baoth's mental and emotional instabilities can never be a threat to us. Yes, he has a great deal of power, and at any given moment he could certainly do considerable damage to our people and equipment. But by his very nature he's unable to use that power for any length of time. Concentration, focus, long-term thinkingthose are the qualities that separate a warrior from a mere flailing fighter. And they're qualities C'baoth will never possess."

 Pellaeon nodded heavily. He still wasn't convinced, but there was clearly no use in arguing the point further. Not now, anyway. Yes, sir." He hesitated. "C'baoth will also want to know about Organa Solo."

 Thrawn's eyes glittered; but the annoyance, Pellaeon knew, wasn't directed at him. "You will tell Master C'baoth that I've decided to allow the Noghri one last chance to find and capture her. When we've finished here, I'll be taking that message to them. Personally."

 Pellaeon glanced back at the entrance to the bridge, where the Noghri bodyguard Rukh stood his usual silent vigil. "You're calling a convocate of the Noghri commandos?" he asked, suppressing a shiver. He'd been to one such mass meeting once, and facing a whole roomful of those quiet gray-skinned killers was not an experience he was anxious to repeat.

 "I think matters have gone beyond simply calling a convocate," Thrawn said coldly. "You'll instruct Navigation to prepare a course from the rendezvous point to the Honoghr system. The entire Noghri populace, I think, needs to be reminded of who it is they serve."

 He shifted his glare out the viewport at the battle and tapped his board. "TIE command: recall all fighters to the ship," he ordered. "Navigation: begin calculations for a return to the rendezvous point."

 Pellaeon frowned out the viewport. The modified Bulk Cruiser and backup Frigate were pretty much dead where they lay, but the convoy itself was largely undamaged. "We're letting them go?"

 "There's no need to destroy them," Thrawn said. "Stripping them of their defense is an adequate object lesson for the moment."

 He tapped a key, and a tactical holo of this section of the galaxy appeared between their two stations. Blue lines marked the Rebellion's main trade routes; those sheathed in red marked ones the Imperial forces had hit in the past month. "There's more to these attacks than simple harassment, Captain. Once this group has told their story, all future convoys from Sarka will demand upgraded protection. Enough such attacks, and the Rebellion will face the choice of either tying up large numbers of its ships with escort duty or effectively abandoning cargo shipment through these border sectors. Either way, it will put them at a serious disadvantage when we launch the Mount Tantiss campaign." He smiled grimly. "Economics and psychology, Captain. For now, the more civilian survivors there are to spread the tale of Imperial power, the better. There'll be time enough for destruction later." He glanced at his board, looked back out the viewport. "Speaking of Imperial power, any news on our ship hunt?"

 "We've had five more capital ships turned in to various Imperial bases in the past ten hours," Pellaeon told him. "Nothing larger than an old Star Galleon, but it's a start."

 "We're going to need more than just a start, Captain," Thrawn said, craning his neck slightly to watch the returning TIE interceptors. "Any word on Talon Karrde?"

 "Nothing since that tip from Rishi," Pellaeon told him, tapping the proper log for an update. "The bounty hunter who sent it was killed shortly afterward."

 "Keep up the pressure," Thrawn ordered. "Karrde knows a great deal about what happens in this galaxy. If there are any capital ships lying unused out there, he'll know where they are."

 Personally, Pellaeon thought it pretty unlikely that a mere smuggler, even one with Karrde's connections, would have better information sources than the vast Imperial Intelligence network. But he'd also dismissed the possibility that Karrde might be hiding Luke Skywalker out at that base on Myrkr. Karrde was turning out to be full of surprises. "There are a lot of people out there hunting for him," he told the Grand Admiral. "Sooner or later, one of them will find him."

 "Good." Thrawn glanced around the bridge. "In the meantime, all units will continue their assigned harassment of the Rebellion." His glowing red eyes bored into Pellaeon's face. "And they will continue, too, to maintain a watch fur theMillennium Falcon and theLady Luck . After the Noghri have been properly primed for their task, I want their prey to be ready for them."

 

 C'baoth awakened suddenly, his black-edged dreams giving way to the sudden realization that someone was approaching.

 For a moment he lay there in the darkness, his long white beard scratching gently against his chest as he breathed, his mind reaching out through the Force to track along the road from the High Castle to the cluster of villages at the base of the rim mountains. It was hard to concentrateso very hardbut with a perverse grimness he ignored the fatigue-driven pain and kept at it. There nothere . A lone man riding a Cracian Thumper, laboring over one of the steeper sections of the roadway. Most likely a messenger, come to bring him some news from the villagers below. Something trifling, no doubt, but something that they felt their new Master should know.

 Master.The word echoed through C'baoth's mind, sparking a windblown tangle of thoughts and feelings. The Imperials who pleaded for him to help them fight their battlesthey called him Master, too. So had the people of Wayland, whose lives he had been content to rule before Grand Admiral Thrawn and his promise of Jedi followers had lured him away.

 The people of Wayland had meant it. The people here on Jomark weren't quite sure yet whether they did or not. The Imperials didn't mean it at all.

 C'baoth felt his lip twist in disgust. No, they most certainly did not. They made him fight their battles for themdrove him by their disbelief to do things he hadn't attempted for years and years. And then, when he'd succeeded in doing the impossible, they still held tightly to their private contempt for him, hiding it behind those ysalamiri creatures and the strange empty spaces they somehow created in the Force.

 But he knew. He'd seen the sideways looks among the officers, and the brief but muttered discussions between them. He'd felt the edginess of the crew, submitting by Imperial order to his influence on their combat skills but clearly disliking the very thought of it. And he'd watched Captain Aban sit there in his command chair on theBellicose , shouting and blaspheming at him even while calling him Master, spitting anger and impotent rage as C'baoth calmly inflicted his punishment on the Rebel ship that had dared to strike at his ship.

 The messenger below was approaching the High Castle gate now. Reaching out with the Force to call his robe to him, C'baoth got out of bed, feeling a brief rush of vertigo as he stood erect. Yes, it had been difficult, that business of taking command of theBellicose 's turbolaser crews for the few seconds it had required to annihilate that Rebel ship. It had gone beyond any previous stretch of concentration and control, and the mental aches he was feeling now were the payment for that stretch.

 He tightened the robe sash around him thinking back. Yes, it had been hard. And yet, at the same time, it had also been strangely exhilarating. On Wayland, he had personally commanded a whole city-state, one with a larger population than that which nestled beneath the High Castle. But there, he'd long since gone beyond the need to impose his will by force. The humans and Psadans had submitted to his authority early on; even the Myneyrshi, with their lingering resentment of his rule, had learned to obey his orders without question.

 The Imperials, as well as the people of Jomark, were going to have to learn that same lesson.

 Back when Grand Admiral Thrawn had first goaded C'baoth into this alliance, he'd implied that C'baoth had been too long without a real challenge. Perhaps the Grand Admiral had also secretly thought that this challenge of running the Empire's war would prove too much for a single Jedi Master to handle.

 C'baoth smiled tightly in the darkness. If that was what the glowing-eyed Grand Admiral thought, he was going to be in for a surprise. Because when Luke Skywalker finally got here, C'baoth would face perhaps the most subtle challenge of his life: to bend and twist another Jedi to his will without the other even being aware of what was happening to him.

 And when he'd succeeded, there would be two of and who could tell what might be possible them then?

 The messenger had dismounted from his Thumper and was standing beside the gate now, his sense that of a man prepared to await the convenience of his Master, no matter how long that wait might be. That was good: exactly the proper attitude. Giving his robe sash one final tug, C'baoth headed through the maze of darkened rooms toward the door, to hear what his new subjects wished to tell him.

 

 CHAPTER
7

 With a delicacy that always seemed so incongruous in a being his size, Chewbacca maneuvered theFalcon into his precisely selected orbital slot above the lush green moon of Endor. Rumbling under his breath, he switched over the power linkages and cut the engines back to standby.

 Seated in the copilot seat, Leia took a deep breath, wincing as one of the twins kicked her from inside. "Doesn't look like Khabarakh's here yet," she commented, realizing even as she said it how superfluous the comment was. She'd been watching the sensors from the moment they dropped out of lightspeed; and given there were no other ships anywhere in the system, there wasn't much chance that they could have missed him. But with the familiar engine roar now cut back down to a whisper, the silence felt strange and even a little eerie to her.

 Chewbacca growled a question. "We wait, I guess, Leia shrugged. "Actually, we're almost a day earlywe got here faster than I'd expected."

 Chewbacca turned back to his board, growling his own interpretation of the Noghri's absence. "Oh, come on," Leia chided him. "If he'd decided to make this meeting into a trap, don't you think they'd have had a couple of Star Destroyers and an Interdictor Cruiser waiting to meet us?"

 "Your Highness?" Threepio's voice called from down the tunnel. "I'm sorry to disturb you, but I believe I've located the fault in the Carbanti countermeasures package. Could you ask Chewbacca to step back for a moment?"

 Leia raised her eyebrows in mild surprise as she looked at Chewbacca. As was depressingly normal with theFalcon , several bits of equipment had gone out early in the flight from Coruscant. Up to his elbows with more important repairs, Chewbacca had assigned the relatively low-priority work on the Carbanti to Threepio. Leia had had no objections, though given the results the last time Threepio had tried to work on theFalcon , she hadn't expected very much to come of it. "We'll make a repair droid out of him yet," she said to Chewbacca. "Your influence, no doubt."

 The Wookiee snorted his opinion of that as he got out of the pilot's seat and headed back to see what Threepio had found. The cockpit door slid open, closed again behind him.

 Leaving the cockpit that much quieter.

 "You see that planet down there, my dears?" Leia murmured, rubbing her belly gently. "That's Endor. Where the Rebel alliance finally triumphed over the Empire, and the New Republic began."

 Or at least, she amended silently to herself that was what the histories some day would say. That the death of the Empire occurred at Endor, with all the rest of it merely a mopping-up action.

 A mopping-up action which had lasted five years, so far. And could wind up lasting another twenty, the way things were going.

 She let her eyes drift across the brilliant mottled green world turning slowly beneath them, wondering yet again why she'd chosen this place for her rendezvous with Khabarakh. True, it was a system that practically every being in both the Republic and Imperial sections of the galaxy had heard of and knew how to find. And with the major planes of contention long gone from this sector, it was a quiet enough place for two ships to meet.

 But there were memories here, too, some of which Leia would just as soon not bring to mind. Before they'd triumphed, they'd very nearly lost everything.

 From down the tunnel, Chewbacca roared a question. "Hang on, I'll check," Leia called back. Leaning over the board, she keyed a switch. "It reads 'standby/modulo,"" she reported. "Wait a minutenow it reads `system ready." Do you want me?"

 And abruptly, without any warning, a black curtain seemed to drop across her vision

 Slowly, she became aware that there was a metallic voice calling to her. "Your Highness," it said over and over again. "Your Highness. Can you hear me? Please, Your Highness, can you hear me?"

 She opened her eyes, vaguely surprised to discover they were closed, to find Chewbacca leaning over her with an open medpack gripped in one huge hand, an agitated Threepio hovering like a nervous mother bird behind him. "I'm all right," she managed. "What happened?"

 "You shouted for help," Threepio put in before Chewbacca could answer. "At least, we thought it was for help," he amended helpfully. "You were brief and rather incoherent."

 "I don't doubt it," Leia told him. It was starting to come back now, like moonlight through the edge of a cloud. The menace, the rage; the hatred, the despair. "You didn't feel it, did you?" she asked Chewbacca.

 He growled a negative, watching her closely. "I felt nothing either," Threepio put in.

 Leia shook her head. "I don't know what it could have been. One minute I was sitting there, and then the next"

 She broke off a sudden horrible thought striking her. "Chewiewhere does this orbit take us? Does it ever pass through the position where the Death Star blew up?"

 Chewbacca stared at her a moment, rumbling something deep in his throat. Then, shifting the medpack to his other hand, he reached past her to key the computer. The answer came almost immediately.

 "Five minutes ago," Leia murmured, feeling cold. "That would be just about right, wouldn't it?

 Chewbacca growled an affirmative, then a question. "I really don't know," she had to admit. "It sounds a little like something Lake went through onduring his Jedi training," she amended, remembering just in time that Luke still wanted Dagobah's significance to be kept a secret. "But he saw a vision. All I felt was I don't know. It was anger and bitterness; but at the same time, there was something almost sad about it. Nosad isn't the right word." She shook her head, sudden tears welling inexplicably up in her eyes. "I don't know. Look, I'm all right. You two can go on back to what you were doing."

 Chewbacca rumbled under his breath again, clearly not convinced. But he said nothing else as he closed the medpack and pushed past Threepio. The cockpit door slid open for him; with the proverbial Wookiee disdain for subtlety, he locked it in that position before disappearing down the tunnel into the main body of the ship.

 Leia focused on Threepio. "You, too," she told him. "Go onyou still have work to do back there. I'm all right. Really."

 "Wellvery well, Your Highness," the droid said, clearly no happier than Chewbacca was. "If you're certain."

 "I am. Go on, scat."

 Threepio dithered another moment, then obediently shuffled out of the cockpit.

 And the silence resumed. A silence that was thicker, somehow, than it had been before. And much darker.

 Leia set her teeth firmly together. "I will not be intimidated," she said aloud to the silence. "Not here; not anywhere."

 The silence didn't reply. After a minute Leia reached over to the board and keyed in a course alteration that would keep them from again passing through the spot where the Emperor had died. Refusing to be intimidated, after all, didn't mean deliberately asking for trouble.

 And after that, there was nothing left to do but wait. And wonder if Khabarakh would indeed come.

 

 The topmost bit of the walled city Ilic poked through the clutching trees of the jungle pressing tightly around it, looking to Han for all the world like some sort of domed topped, silver-skinned droid drowning in a sea of green quicksand. "Any idea how we land on that thing?" he asked.

 "Probably through those vents near the top," Lando said, pointing at theLady Luck 's main display. "They read large enough for anything up to about W-class space barge to get into."

 Han nodded, fingers plucking restlessly at the soft armrest of his copilot seat. There weren't a lot of things in the galaxy that could make him nervous, but having to sit there while someone else made a tricky landing was one of them. "This is even a crazier place to live than that Nomad City thing of yours," he growled.

 "No argument from me," Lando agreed, adjusting their altitude a bit. Several seconds later than Han would have done it. "At least on Nkllon we don't have to worry about getting eaten by some exotic plant. But that's economics for you. At last count there were eight cities in this part of New Cov, and two more being built."

 Han grimaced. And all because of those same exotic plants. Or to be specific, the exotic biomolecules that could be harvested from them. The Covies seemed to think the profit was worth having to live in armored cities all the time. No one knew what the plants thought about it. "They're still crazy," he said. "Watch out, they may have magnetic airlocks on those entrance ducts.

 Lando gave him a patient look. "Will you relax? I have flown ships before, you know."

 "Yeah," Han muttered. Setting his teeth together, he settled in to suffer through the landing.

 It wasn't as bad as he'd expected. Lando got his clearance from Control and guided theLady Luck with reasonable skill into the flaring maw of one of the entrance ducts, following the curved pipe down and inward to a brightly lit landing area just beneath the transparisteel dome that topped the city walls. Inbound customs were a mere formality, though given the planet's dependence on exports, the outbound scrutiny would probably be a lot tighter. They were officially welcomed to Ilic by a professional greeter with a professional smile, given a data card with maps of the city and surrounding territory, and then turned loose.

 "That wasn't so hard," Lando commented as they rode a sliding spiral ramp down through the spacious open center. At each level walkways led outward from the ramp to the market, administrative, and living areas of the city. "Where are we supposed to be meeting Luke?"

 "Three more levels down, in one of the entertainment districts," Han told him. "The Imperial library didn't have much detail on this place, but it did mention a little tap cafe called the Mishra attached to some half-size version they've got of the old Grandis Mon theater on Coruscant. I got the impression it was kind of a watering hole for local big shots."

 "Sounds like a good place, to meet," Lando agreed. He threw Han a sideways look. "So. You ready to show me the hook yet?"

 Han frowned. "Hook?"

 "Come on, you old pirate," Lando snorted. "You pick me up at Sluis Van, ask for a lift out to New Cov, send Luke on ahead for this cloak-and-blade rendezvousand you expect me to believe you're just going to wave goodbye now and let me go back to Nkllon?"

 Han gave his friend his best wounded look. "Come on, Lando"

 "The hook, Han. Let me see the hook."

 Han sighed theatrically. "There isn't any hook, Lando," he said. "You can leave for Nkllon any time you want to. `Course," he added casually, "if you hung around a little and gave us a hand, you might be able to work a deal here to unload any spare metals you had lying around. Like, oh, a' stockpile of hfredium or something."

 Carefully keeping his eyes forward, he could still feel the heat of Lando's glare. "Luke told you about that, didn't he?" Lando demanded.

 Han shrugged. "He might have mentioned it," he conceded.

 Lando hissed between clenched teeth. "I'm going to strangle him," he announced. "Jedi or not, I'm going to strangle him."

 "Oh, come on, Lando," Han soothed. "You hang around a couple days you listen to people's jabberings, you maybe dig us out a lead or two about what Fey'lya's got going here, and that's it. You go home and back to your mining operation, and we never bother you again."

 "I've heardthat before," Lando countered. But Han could hear the resignation in his voice, "What makes you think Fey'lya's got contacts on New Cov?"

 "Because during the war, this was the only place his Bothans ever seined to care about defending"

 He broke off, grabbing Lando's arm and turning both of them hard to the right toward the central column of the spiral walkway. "What" Lando managed.

 "Quiet!" Han hissed, trying to simultaneously hide his face and still watch the figure he'd spotted leaving the ramp one level down. "That Bothan down there to the leftsee him?"

 Lando turned slightly, peering in the indicated direction out of the corner of his eye. "What about him?"

 "It's Tav Breil'lya. One of Fey'lya's top aides."

 "You're kidding," Lando said, frowning down at the alien. "How can you tell?"

 "That neck piece he wearssome kind of family crest or something. I've seen it dozens of times at Council meetings." Han chewed at his lip, trying to think. If that really was Breil'lya over there, finding out what he was up to could save them a lot of time. But Luke was probably sitting in the tapcafe downstairs right now waiting for them "I'm going to follow him," he told Lando, shoving his data pad and the city map into the other's hands. "You head down to the Mishra, grab Luke, and catch up with me."

 "But"

 "If you're not with me in an hour I'll try calling on the comlink," Han cut him off stepping toward the outside of the ramp. They were nearly to the Bothan's level now. "Don't call meI might be someplace I wouldn't want a call beep going off." He stepped off the ramp onto the walkway.

 "Good luck," Lando called softly after him.

 There was a good scattering of aliens among the humans wandering around Ilic, but Breil'lya's cream-colored fur stood out of the crowd enough to make him easy to follow. Which was just as well. If Han could recognize the Bothan, the Bothan could probably recognize him right back, and it would be risky to have to get too close.

 Luckily, the alien didn't seem to even consider the possibility that anyone might be following him. He kept up a steady pace, never turning around, as he headed past cross streets and shops and atria toward the outer city wall. Han stayed with him, wishing he hadn't been so quick to give the city map to Lando. It might have been nice to have some idea where he was going.

 They passed through one final atrium and reached a section of warehouse-type structures abutting a vast mural that seemed to have been painted directly on the inner city wall. Breil'lya went straight to one of the buildings near the mural and disappeared through the front door.

 Han ducked into a convenient doorway about thirty meters down the street from the warehouse. The door Breil'lya had gone through, he could see, carried the faded sign Amethyst Shipping and Storage above it. "I just hope it's on the map," he muttered under his breath, pulling his comlink from his belt.

 "It is," a woman's voice came softly from behind him.

 Han froze. "Hello?" he asked tentatively.

 "Hello," she said back. "Turn around, please. Slowly, of course."

 Han did as ordered, the comlink still in hand. "If this is a robbery"

 "Don't be silly." The woman was short and slender, perhaps ten years older than him, with closecut graying hair and a thin face which under other circumstances would look friendly enough. The blaster pointed his direction was some unfamiliar knockoff of a BlasTech DL-18not nearly as powerful as his own DL-44, but under the circumstances the difference didn't matter a whole lot. "Put the comlink on the ground," she continued. "Your blaster, too, as long as you're down there."

 Silently, Han crouched down, drawing his weapon out with exaggerated caution. Under cover of the motion, with most of her attention hopefully on the blaster, he flicked on the comlink. Laying both on the ground, he straightened and took a step back, just to prove that he knew the proper procedure for prisoners. "Now what?"

 "You seem interested in the little get-together yonder," she said, stooping to retrieve the blaster and comlink. "Perhaps you'd like a guided tour."

 "That would be great," Han told her, raising his hands and hoping that she wouldn't think to look at the comlink before putting it away in one of the pockets in her jumpsuit.

 She didn't look at it. She did, however, shut it off. "I think I'm insulted," she said mildly. "That has to be the oldest trick on the list."

 Han shrugged, determined to maintain at least a little dignity here. "I didn't have time to come up with any new ones.

 "Apology accepted. Come on, let's go. And lower ycur handswe don't want any passersby wondering, now, do we?"

 "Of course not," Han said, dropping his hands to his sides.

 They were halfway to the Amethyst when, off in the distance, a siren began wailing.

 

 It was, Luke thought as he looked around the Mishra, almost like an inverted replaying of his first visit to the Mos Eisley cantina on Tatooine all those years ago.

 True, the Mishra. was light-years more sophisticated than that dilapidated place had been, with a correspondingly more upscale clientele. But the bar and tables were crowded with the same wide assortment of humans and aliens, the smells and sounds were equally variegated, and the band off in the corner was playing similar musica style, obviously, that had been carefully tailored to appeal to a multitude of different races.

 There was one other difference, too. Crowded though the place might be, the patrons were leaving Luke a respectful amount of room at the bar.

 He took a sip of his drinka local variant of the hot chocolate Lando had introduced him to, this one with a touch of mintand glanced over at the entrance. Han and Lando should have been only a couple of hours behind him, which meant they could be walking in at any minute. He hoped so, anyway. He'd understood Han's reasons for wanting the two ships to come into Ilic separately, but with all the threats that seemed to be hanging over the New Republic, they couldn't really afford to waste time. He took another sip

 And from behind him came an inhuman bellow.

 He spun around, hand automatically yanking his lightsaber from his belt, as the sound of a chair crashing over backwards added an exclamation point to the bellow. Five meters away from him, in the middle of a circle of frozen patrons, a Barabel and a Radian stood facing each other over a table, both with blasters drawn.

 "No blasters! No blasters!" an SE4 servant droid called, waving his arms for emphasis as he scuttled toward the confrontation. In the flick of an eye, the Barabel shifted aim and blew the droid apart, bringing his blaster back to bear on the Radian before the other could react.

 "Hey!" the bartender said indignantly. "That's going to cost you"

 "Shut up," the Barabel cut him off with a snarl. "Radian will pay you. After he pay me.

 The Radian drew himself up to his full height which still left him a good half meter shorter than his opponentand spat something in a language Luke didn't understand. "You lie," the Barabel spat back. "You cheat. I know."

 The Radian said something else. "You no like?" the Barabel countered, his voice haughty. "You do anyway. I call on Jedi for judgment."

 Every eye in the tapcafe had been riveted to the confrontation.

 Now, in almost perfect unison, the gazes turned to Luke. "What?" he asked cautiously.

 "He wants you to settle the dispute," the bartender said, relief evident in his voice.

 A relief that Luke himself was far from feeling. "Me?"

 The bartender gave him a strange look. "You're the Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker, aren't you?" he asked, gesturing at the lightsaber in Luke's hand.

 "Yes," Luke admitted.

 "Well, then," the bartender concluded, waving a hand toward the disputants.

 Except that, Jedi or no Jedi, Luke didn't have a drop of legal authority here. He opened his mouth to tell the bartender that

 And then took another look into the other's eyes.

 Slowly, he turned back around, the excuses sticking unsaid in his throat. It wasn't just the bartender, he saw. Everyone in the tapcafe, it seemed, was looking at him with pretty much the same expression. An expression of expectation and trust.

 Trust in the judgment of a Jedi.

 Taking a quiet breath, sternly ordering his pounding heart to calm down, he started through the crowd toward the confrontation. Ben Kenobi had introduced him to the Force; Yoda had taught him how to use the Force for self control and self-defense. Neither had ever taught him anything about mediating arguments.

 "All right," he said as he reached the table. "The first thing you're going to doboth of youis put away your weapons.

 "Who first?" the Barabel demanded. "Radians collect bountyhe shoot if I disarm."

 This was certainly getting off to a great start. Suppressing a sigh, Luke ignited his lightsaber, holding it out so that the brilliant green blade was directly between the opposing blasters. "No one is going to shoot anyone," he said flatly. "Put them away.

 Silently, the Barabel complied. The Radian hesitated a second longer, then followed suit. "Now tell me the problem," Luke said, shutting down the lightsaber but keeping it ready in his hand.

 "He hire me for tracking job," the Barabel said, jabbing a keratin-plated finger at the Radian. "I do what he say. But he no pay me."

 The Radian said something indignant sounding. "Just a minute I'll get to you," Luke told him, wondering how he was going to handle that'part of the cross-examination. "What sort of job was it?"

 "He ask me hunt animal nest for him," the Barabel said. "Animals bothering little shipseating at sides. I do what he say. He burn animal nest, get money. But then he pay me in no-good money." He gestured down at a now scattered pile of gold-colored metal chips.

 Luke picked one up. It was small and triangular, with an intricate pattern of lines in the center, and inscribed with a small "100" in each corner. "Anyone ever see this currency before?" he called, holding it up.

 "It's new Imperial scrip," someone dressed in an expensive business coat said with thinly veiled contempt. "You can only spend it on Imperial-held worlds and stations."

 Luke grimaced. Another reminder, if he'd needed one, that the war for control of the galaxy was far from over. "Did you tell him beforehand that you'd be paying in this?" he asked the Radian.

 The other said something in his own language. Luke glanced around the circle, wondering if asking for a translator would diminish his perceived status here. "He says that that was how he was paid," a familiar voice said; and Luke turned to see Lando ease his way to the front of the crowd. "Says he argued about it, but that he didn't have any choice in the matter."

 "Thatis how the Empire's been doing business lately," someone in the crowd offered. "At least around here."

 The Barabel spun toward the other. "I no want your judgment," he snarled. "Only Jedi give judgment."

 "All right, calm down," Luke told him, fingering the chit and wondering what he was going to do. If this really was the way the Radian had been paid"Is there any way to convert these into something else?" he asked the Radian.

 The other answered. "He says no," Lando translated. "You can use them for goods and services on Imperial worlds, but since no one in the New Republic will take them, there's no official rate of exchange."

 "Right," Luke said dryly. He might not have Lando's experience in under-the-plate operations, but he hadn't been born yesterday, either. "So what's theun official exchange rate?"

 "No idea, actually," Lando said, looking around the crowd. "Must be someone here who works both sides of the street, though." He raised his voice. "Anyone here do business with the Empire?"

 If they did, they were keeping quiet about it. "Shy, aren't they?" Luke murmured.

 "About admitting Imperial dealings to a Jedi?" Lando countered. "I'd be shy, too."

 Luke nodded, feeling a sinking sense in the pit of his stomach as he studied the Radian's tapirlike snout and passive, multifaceted eyes. He'd hoped that he could simply smooth out the problem and thereby avoid the need to pass any kind of real judgment. Now, he had no choice but to rule on whether the Radian was in fact deliberately trying to cheat his partner.

 Closing his eyes down to slits, he composed his mind and stretched out his senses. It was a long shot, he knew; but most species showed subtle physiological changes when under stress. If the Radian was lying about the paymentand if he thought that Luke's Jedi skills could catch him at ithe might react enough to incriminate himself.

 But even as Luke ran through the sensory enhancement techniques, something else caught his attention. It was an odor: a faint whiff of Carababba tabac and armudu. The same combination Lando had called his attention to on the Sluis Van space station

 Luke opened his eyes and looked around the crowd. "Niles Ferrier," he called. "Will you step forward, please."

 There was a long pause, punctuated only by Lando's sudden hissing intake of air at Ferrier's name. Then, with a rustle of movement from one side of the circle, a familiar bulky figure pushed his way to the front. "What do you want?" he demanded, his hand resting on the butt of his holstered blaster.

 "I need to know the unofficial exchange rate between Imperial and New Republic currencies," Luke said. "I thought perhaps you could tell me what it is."

 Ferrier studied him with ill-concealed scorn. "This is your problem, Jedi. Leave me out of it."

 There was a low rumble of displeasure from the crowd. Luke didn't reply, but held Ferrier in a level gaze; and after a moment, the other's lip twisted. "The last time I did business on the other side, we settled on a five to four Empire/Republic conversion," he growled.

 "Thank you," Luke said. "That seems straightforward enough, then," he continued, turning to the Radian. "Pay your associate with New Republic currency at a five/four exchange rate and take the Empire scrip back for the next time you work in their territory."

 The Radian spat something. "That is lie!" the Barabel snarled back.

 "He says he doesn't have enough in New Republic currency," Lando translated. "Knowing Radians, I'd tend to agree with the Barabel."

 "Perhaps." Luke stared hard into the Radian's faceted eyes.

 "Perhaps not. But there might be another way." He looked back at Ferrier, raised his eyebrows questioningly.

 The other was sharp, all right. "Don't even think it, Jedi," he warned.

 "Why not?" Luke asked. "You work both sides of the border. You're more likely to be able to spend Imperial scrip than the Barabel could."

 "Suppose I don't want to?" Ferrier countered. "Suppose I don't plan to go back any time soon. Or maybe I don't want to get caught with that much Imperial scrip on me. Fix it yourself, JediI don't owe you any favors."

 The Barabel whirled on him. "You talk respect," he snarled. "He is Jedi. You talk respect."

 A low rumble of agreement rippled through the crowd. "Better listen to him," Lando advised. "I don't think you'd want to get in a fight here, especially not with a Barabel. They've always had a soft spot for Jedi."

 "Yeahright behind their snouts," Ferrier retorted. But his eyes were flicking around the crowd now, and Luke caught the subtle shift in his sense as he began to realize just how much in the minority his opinion of Luke was.

 Or perhaps he was realizing that winding up in the middle of an official flap might buy him more attention than he really wanted to have. Luke waited, watching the other's sense flicker with uncertainty, waiting for him to change his mind.

 When it happened, it happened quickly. "All right, but it'll have to be a five/three exchange," Ferrier insisted. "The five/four was a flukeno telling if I'll ever get that again."

 "It is cheat," the Barabel declared. "I deserve more from Radian."

 "Yes, you do," Luke agreed. "But under the circumstances, this is probably the best you're going to get." He looked at the Radian. "If it helps any," he added to the Barabel, "remember that you can pass a warning to the rest of your people about dealing with this particular Radian. Not being able to hire expert Barabel hunters will hurt him far more in the long run than he might cost you now."

 The Barabel made a grating noise that was probably the equivalent of a laugh. "Jedi speak truth," he said. "Punishment is good.

 Luke braced himself. This part the Barabel wasn't going to be nearly so happy about. "You will, however, have to pay for the repair of the droid you shot. Whatever the Radian said or did, he is not responsible for that."

 The Barabel stared at Luke, his needle teeth making small, tight biting motions. Luke returned the cold gaze, senses alert to the Force for any intimation of attack. "Jedi again speak truth," the alien said at last. Reluctantly, but firmly. "I accept judgment."

 Luke let out a quiet sigh of relief. "Then the matter is closed," he said. He looked at Ferrier, then raised his lightsaber to his forehead in salute to the two aliens and turned away.

 "Nicely done," Lando murmured in his ear as the crowd began to break up.

 "Thanks," Luke murmured, his mouth dry. It had worked, all rightbut it had been more luck than skill, and he knew it. If Ferrier hadn't been thereor if the ship thief hadn't decided to back downLuke had no idea how he would have solved the dispute. Leia and her diplomatic training would have done better than he had; even Han and his long experience at hard bargaining would have done as well.

 It was an aspect of Jedi responsibility that he'd never considered before. But it was one he'd better start thinking about, and fast.

 "Han's following one of Fey'lya's Bothan pals up on Level Four," Lando was saying as they moved through the crowd toward the exit. "Spotted him from the west central ramp and sent me to"

 He stopped short. From outside the Mishra the sound of wailing sirens had started. "I wonder what that is," he said, a touch of uneasiness in his voice.

 "It's an alarm," one of the tapcafe patrons said, his forehead wrinkled in concentration as he listened. The pitch of the siren changed; changed again"It's a raid."

 "A raid?" Luke frowned. He hadn't heard of any pirate activity in this sector. "Who's raiding you?"

 "Who else?" the man retorted. "The Empire."

 Luke looked at Lando. "Uh-oh," he said quietly.

 "Yeah," Lando agreed. "Come on.

 They left the Mishra and headed out into the wide avenue. Oddly enough, there were no signs of the panic Luke would hayed expected to find. On the contrary, the citizens of Ilic seemed to be continuing about their daily business as if nothing untoward was happening. "Maybe they don't realize what's going on," he suggested doubtfully as they headed for one of the spiral ramps.

 "Or else they've got a quiet agreement with the Empire," Lando countered sourly. "Maybe the leadership finds it politically handy to align themselves with the New Republic, but they also want to keep in the Empire's good graces. Since they can't pay anything as overt as tribute, they instead let the Imperials come in every so often and raid their stocks of refined biomolecules. I've seen that sort of thing done before."

 Luke looked around at the unconcerned crowds. "Only this time it might backfire on them."

 "Like if the Imperials spot theLady Luck and your X-wing on the landing records."

 "Right. Where did you say Han was?"

 "Last I saw, be was on Level Four heading west," Lando said, digging out his comlink. "He told me not to call him, but I think this qualifies as an unforeseen circumstance."

 "Wait a minute," Luke stopped him. "If he's anywhere near this aide of Fey'lya'sand if Fey'lya is working some kind of deal with the Empire?"

 "You're right." Lando swore under his breath as he put the comlink away. "So what do we do?"

 They'd reached the ramp now and stepped onto the section spiraling upward. "I'll go find Han," Luke said. "You get up to the landing area and see what's happening. If the Imperials haven't actually landed yet, you might be able to get into the air control computer and erase us from the list. Artoo can help if you can get him out of my X-wing and over to a terminal without being caught."

 "I'll give it a try."

 "Okay." A stray memory flicked through Luke's mind "I don't suppose theLady Luck 's equipped with one of those full-rig slave circuits you talked about back on Nkllon, is it?"

 Lando shook his head. "It's rigged, but only with a simple homing setup. Nothing much more than straight-line motion and a little maneuvering. It'd never be able to get to me through the middle of an enclosed city like this."

 And even if it could, Luke had to admit, it wouldn't do them much good. Short of blasting a huge hole through the outer wall, the only way out of Ilic for anything the size of a spaceship was through the exit ducts above the landing area. "It was just a thought," he said.

 "Here's where Han got off," Lando said, pointing. "He headed that way.

 "Right." Luke stepped off the ramp. "See you soon. Be careful."

 "You, too."

 

 CHAPTER
8

 The graying woman took Han to a small office-type room in the Amethyst building, turned him over to a couple of other guard types there, and disappeared with his blaster, comlink, and ID in hand. Han tried once or twice to strike up a conversation with the guards, got no response from either of them, and had just about resigned himself to sitting quietly, listening to the sirens outside, when the woman returned.

 Accompanied by another, taller woman with the unmistakable air of authority about her. "Good day to you," the tall woman said, nodding at Han. "Captain Han Solo, I believe?"

 With his ID in her hand, there didn't seem much point in denying it. "That's right," he said.

 "We're honored by your visit," she said, her tone putting a slightly sardonic edge to the polite words. "Though a bit surprised by it."

 "I don't know whythe visit was your idea," Han countered. "You always pick people up off the street like this?"

 slightly. "You want to tell me who you are and who sent you?"

 Han frowned. "What do you mean, who am I? You've got my ID right there.

 "Yes, I do," the woman nodded, turning the card over in her hand. "But there's some difference of opinion as to whether or not it's genuine." She looked out the door and beckoned

 And Tav Breil'lya stepped past her into the room. "I was right," the Bothan said, his cream-colored fur rippling in an unfamiliar pattern. "As I told you when I first saw his ID. He is an impostor. Most certainly an Imperial spy."

 "What?" Han stared at him, the whole situation tilting slightly off vertical. He looked at the alien's neck pieceit was Tav Breil'lya, all right. "What did you call me?"

 "You're an Imperial spy," Breil'lya repeated, his fur rippling again. "Come to destroy our friendship, or even to kill us all. But you'll never live to report back to your masters. He turned to the tall woman. "You must destroy him at once, Sena," he urged. "Before he has the chance to summon your enemies here."

 "Let's not do anything rash, Council-Aide Breil'lya," Sena soothed. "Irenez has a good picket screen in position." She looked at Han. "would you care to respond to the Council-Aide's accusations?"

 "We have no interest in the ravings of an Imperial spy," Breil'lya insisted before Han could speak.

 "On the contrary, Council-Aide," Sena countered. "Around here, we have an interest in a great many things." She turned back to Han, lifted his ID. "Do you have any proof other than this that you're who you claim to be?

 "It doesn't matter who he is," Breil'lya jumped in again, his voice starting to sound a little strained. "He's seen you, and he must certainly know that we have some kind of arrangement. Whether he's from the Empire or the New Republic is irrelevantboth are your enemies, and both would use such information against you."

 Sena's eyebrows lifted again. "So now his identity doesn't matter," she said coolly. "Does that mean you're no longer certain he's an impostor?"

 Breil'lya's fur rippled again. Clearly, he wasn't as quick on his verbal feet as his boss. "He's a very close likeness," the other muttered. "Though a proper dissection would quickly establish for certain who he is."

 Sena smiled slightly. But it was a smile of understanding, not of humor and suddenly Han realized that the confrontation had been as much a test of Breil'lya as it had been of him. And if Sena's expression was anything to go by, the Bothan had just flunked it. "I'll keep that recommendation in mind," she told him dryly.

 There was a soft beep, and the gray-haired woman pulled out a comlink and spoke quietly into it. She listened, spoke again, and looked up at Sena. "Picket line reports another man approaching," she said. "Medium build, dark blond hair, dressed in black"she threw a glance at Breil'lya"and carrying what appears to be a lightsaber."

 Sena looked at Breil'lya, too. "I believe that ends the discussion," she said. "Have one of the pickets meet him, Irenez, and ask him if he'll join us. Make it clear that's a request, not an order. Then return Captain Solo's weapon and equipment to him." She turned to Han, nodded gravely to him as she returned his ID. "My apologies, Captain. You understand we have to be cautious. Particularly given the coincidence of this." She gestured toward the outside wall.

 Han frowned, wondering what she meant. Then he got it: she was indicating the sirens still wailing outside. "No problem," he assured her. "What are the sirens for, anyway?"

 "It's an Imperial raid," Irenez said, handing him his blaster and comlink.

 Han froze. "A raid?"

 "It's no big deal," Sena assured him. "They come by every few months and take a percentage of the refined biomolecules that have been packaged for export. It's a covert form of taxation the city governments have worked out with them. Don't worry, they never come any farther in than the landing level."

 "Yeah, well, they may change the routine a little this time," Han growled, flicking on his comlink. He half expected someone to try to stop him, but no one even twitched. "Luke?"

 "I'm here, Han," the younger man's voice came back. "My escort tells me I'm being brought to where you are. You all right?"

 "Just a little misunderstanding. Better get in here fastwe got company.

 "Right."

 Han shut off the comlink. Sena and Irenez, he saw, had meanwhile been having a quiet conversation of their own. "If you're as touchy about Imperials as Breil'lya implied, you might want to find a hole to disappear into," he advised.

 "Our escape route's ready," Sena assured him as Irenez left the room. "The question is what to do with you and your friend."

 "You can't just firm them loose," Breil'lya insisted, trying one last time. "You know full well that if the New Republic learns about you"

 The Commander is being notified," Sena cut him off. "He decide."

 "But"

 "That's all, Council-Aide," she cut him off again, her voice suddenly hard. "Join the others at the lift shaft. You'll accompany me on my ship."

 Breil'lya threw one last unreadable look at Han, then silently left the room.

 "Who's this Commander of yours?" Han asked.

 "I can't tell you that." Sena studied him a moment. "Don't worry, though. Despite what Breil'lya said, we're not enemies of the New Republic. At least, not at the moment."

 "Oh," Han said. "Great."

 There was the sound of footsteps from the hallway outside. A few seconds later, accompanied by two young men with holstered blasters, Luke stepped into the room.

 "Han," Luke greeted his friend, giving Sena a quick once-over.

 `You all right?"

 "I'm fine," Han assured him. "Like I said, a little misunderstanding. The lady hereSena" He paused expectantly.

 "Let's just leave it at Sena for now," she said.

 "Ah," Han said. He'd hoped to get her last name, but clearly she wasn't' in the habit of giving it out. "Anyway, Sena thought I was an Imperial spy. And speaking of Imperials"

 "I know," Luke nodded.

 "Lando's gone up to see if he can clear our ships from the landing record."

 "He won't be able to," Han shook his head. "Not in time. And they're bound to pull the landing list."

 Luke nodded agreement. "Then we'd better get up there."

 "Unless you'd all rather come with us," Sena offered. "There's plenty of room on our ship, and it's hidden away where they won't find it."

 "Thanks, but no," Han said. He wasn't about to go off with these people until he knew a lot more about them. Whose side they were on, for starters. "Lando won't want to leave his ship."

 "And I need to get my droid back," Luke added.

 Irenez slipped back into the room. "Everyone's on their way down, and the ship's being prepped," she told Sena. "And I got through to the Commander." She handed the tall woman a data pad.

 Sena glanced at it, nodded and turned back to Han. "There's a service shaft near here that opens up into the west edge of the landing area," she told him. "I doubt the Imperials know about it; it's not on any of the standard city maps. Irenez will guide you up there and give you what help she can."

 "That's really not necessary," Han told her.

 Sena held up the data pad. "The Commander has instructed me to give you whatever aid you require," she said firmly. "I'd appreciate it if you'd allow me to carry out my orders."

 Han looked at Luke, raised his eyebrows. Luke shrugged slightly in return: if there was treachery in the offer, his Jedi senses weren't picking it up. "Fine, she can tag along," he said. "Let's go."

 "Good luck," Sena said, and disappeared out the door.

 Irenez gestured to the door after her. "This way, gentlemen."

 The service shaft was a combination stairway and liftcar tube set into the outer city wall, its entrance almost invisible against the swirling pattern of that section of the mural. The liftcar itself was nowhere to be seenprobably, Han decided, still ferrying Sena's group to wherever it was they'd stashed their ship. With Irenez in the lead, they started up the stairs.

 It was only three levels up to the landing area. But three levels in a city with Ilic's high-ceilinged layout translated into a lot of stairs. The first level ran to fifty-three steps; after that, Han stopped counting. By the time they slipped through another disguised door into the landing area and took cover behind a massive diagnostic analyzer, his legs were beginning to tremble with fatigue. Irenez, in contrast, wasn't even breathing hard.

 "Now what?" Luke asked, looking cautiously around the analyzer. He hasn't breathing hard, either.

 "Let's find Lando," Han said, pulling out his comlink and thumbing his call. "Lando?"

 "Right here," the other's whispered voice came back instantly.

 "Where are you?"

 "West end of the landing area, about twenty meters from Luke's X-wing. How about you?"

 "About ninety degrees away from you toward the south," Lando answered. "I'm behind a stack of shipping boxes. There's a stormtrooper standing guard about five meters away, so I'm sort of stuck here."

 "What sort of trouble are we looking at?"

 "It looks like a full-fledged task force," Lando said grimly. "I saw three drop ships come in, and I think there were one or two on the ground when I got here. If they were fully loaded, that translates to a hundred sixty to two hundred men. Most of them are regular army troops, but there are a few storm troopers in the crowd, too. There aren't too many of either still up heremost of them headed on down the ramps a few minutes ago.

 "Probably gone to search the city for us," Luke murmured.

 "Yeah." Han eased up to look over the analyzer. The top of Luke's X-wing was just visible over the nose of a W-23 space barge. "Looks like Artoo's still in Luke's ship."

 "Yeah, but I saw them doing something over that way," Lando warned. "They may have put a restraining bolt on him."

 "We can handle that." Han scanned as much of the area around them as he could see. "I think we can make it to the X-wing without being spotted. You told me on the trip here that you had a beckon call for theLady Luck , right?"

 "Right, but it's not going to do me any good," Lando said. "With all these boxes around, there's no place I can set it down without opening myself to fire."

 "That's okay," Han told him, feeling a tight smile twist at his lip. Luke might have the Force, and Irenez might be able to climb stairs without getting winded; but he would bet heavily that he could outdo both of them in sheer chicanery. "You just get it moving toward you when I give the word."

 He switched off the comlink. "We're going over to the X-wing," he told Luke and Irenez, adjusting his grip on his blaster. "You ready?"

 He got two acknowledgments, and with a last look around the area headed as quickly as silence permitted across the floor. He reached the space barge lying across their path without incident, paused there to let the others catch up

 "Shh!" Luke hissed.

 Han froze, pressing himself against the barge's corroded hull. Not four meters away a stormtrooper standing guard was starting to turn in their direction.

 Clenching his teeth, Han raised his blaster. But even as he did so, his peripheral vision caught Luke's hand making some sort of gesture; and suddenly the Imperial spun around in the opposite direction, pointing his blaster rifle toward a patch of empty floor. "He thinks he heard a noise," Luke whispered. "Let's go.

 Han nodded, and sidled around to the other side of the barge. A few seconds later they were crouched beside the X-wing's landing skids. "Artoo?" Han stage-whispered upward. "Come on, short stuff wake up."

 There was a soft and rather indignant beep from the top of the X-wing. Which meant the Imperials' restraining bolt hadn't shut the droid down entirely, just blocked out his control of the X-wing's systems. Good. "Okay," he called to the droid. "Get your comm sensor warmed up and get ready to record."

 Another beep. "Now what?" Irenez asked.

 "Now we get cute," Han told her, pulling out his comlink. "Lando? You ready?"

 "As ready as I'm going to be," the other came back.

 "Okay. When I give the signal, turn on your beckon call and get theLady Luck moving. When I tell you again, shut it off. Got that?"

 "Got it. I hope you know what you're doing.

 "Trust me." Han looked at Luke. "You got your part figured out?"

 Luke nodded, holding up his lightsaber. "I'm ready."

 "Okay, Lando. Go."

 For a long moment nothing happened. Then, through the background noise of the landing area, came the distinctive whine of repulsorlifts being activated. Half standing up, Han was just in time to see theLady Luck rise smoothly up from among the other docked ships.

 From somewhere in the same general vicinity came a shout, followed by the multiple flash of blaster fire. Another three weapons opened up almost immediately, all four tracking theLady Luck as it made a somewhat ponderous turn and began floating south toward Lando's hiding place.

 "You know it'll never get there," Irenez muttered in Han's ear. "As soon a, they figure out where it's going, they'll be all over him.

 "That's why it's not going to get to him," Han countered, watching theLady Luck closely. Another couple of seconds and every stormtrooper and Imperial soldier in the place ought to have his attention solidly fixed on the rogue ship"Ready, Lukenow ."

 And suddenly Luke was gone, a single leap taking him to the top of the X-wing. Over the commotion Han heard thesnap-hiss as Luke ignited his lightsaber, could see the green glow reflected from the nearest ships and equipment. The glow and sound shifted subtly as Luke made a short slice

 "Restraining bolt's off" Luke called down. "Now?"

 "Not yet," Han told him. TheLady Luck was about a quarter of the way to the far wall, blaster bolts still scattering off its armored underside. "I'll tell him when. You get ready to fly interference."

 "Right." The X-wing rocked slightly as Luke moved forward and dropped into the cockpit, its own repulsorlifts beginning to whine as Artoo activated them.

 A whine that no one else out in all that confusion had a hope of hearing. TheLady Luck was hallway to the wall now"Okay, Lando, shut down," Han ordered. "Artoo, your turn. Call it back this way."

 With full access again to the X-wing's transmitters, it was a simple task for the droid to duplicate the signal from Lando's beckon call. TheLady Luck shuddered to a halt, reoriented itself to the new call, and started across the landing area again toward the X-wing.

 It wasn't something the Imperials had expected. For a second the blaster fire faltered as the soldiers chasing the yacht skidded to a halt; and by the time the fire resumed in earnest, theLady Luck was nearly to the X-wing.

 "Now?" Luke called.

 "Now," Han called back. "Put her down and clear us a path."

 Artoo twittered, and theLady Luck again halted in midair, this time dropping smoothly to the ground. There was a shout that sounded like triumph from the Imperials but if so, it was the shortest triumph on record. TheLady Luck touched down

 And without warning, the X-wing leaped into the air. Pulling a tight curve around theLady Luck , Luke swooped back down, wingtip lasers spitting a corridor of destruction across the startled soldiers' line of approach.

 Given time, the Imperials would regroup. Han had no intention of giving them that time. "Come on," he snapped to Irenez, leaping to his feet and making a mad dash for theLady Luck . He was probably on the ramp before the soldiers even noticed him, and was up and through the hatch before anyone was able to get off a shot. "Stay here and guard the hatch," he shouted back as Irenez charged in behind him. "I'm going to go pick up Lando."

 Luke was still roaring around creating havoc as Han scrambled into the cockpit and dived into the pilot's seat, throwing a quick look at the instruments as he did so. All the systems seemed to be ready; and anything that wasn't was going to have to do so on the way up. "Grab onto something!" he shouted back to Irenez and lifted.

 The stormtrooper Lando had mentioned as being near his position was nowhere in sight as Han brought theLady Luck swinging over to the pile of shipping boxes. Luke was right with him, the X-wing's lasers making a mess of the landing area floor as he kept the Imperials pinned down. Han dropped the ship to within a half meter of the floor, entrance ramp swiveled toward the boxes. There was a flicker of motion, visible for just a second through the cockpit's side viewport

 "We've got him," Irenez shouted from the hatch. "Go!"

 Han swiveled the ship around, throwing full power to the repulsorlifts and heading upward into one of the huge exit ducts overhead. There was a slight jolt as he cleared the magnetic seal on the end, and then they were out in clear air, screaming hard for space.

 Four TIE fighters were skulking around just above the city, waiting for trouble. But they apparently weren't waiting for it to come this quickly. Luke got three of them on the fly, and Han took out the fourth.

 "Nothing like cutting it close to the wire," Lando panted as he slid into the copilot's seat and got busy with his board. "What have we got?"

 "Looks like a couple more drop ships coming in, Han told him, frowning. "What are you doing?"

 "Running a multisensor airflow analysis," Lando said. "It'll show up any large irregularities on the hull. Like if someone's attached a homing beacon to us.

 Han thought back to that escape from the first Death Star, and their near-disastrous flight to Yavin with just such a gadget smuggled aboard. "I wish I had a system like that for theFalcon ."

 "It'd never work," Lando commented dryly. "Your hull's so irregular already the system would go nuts just trying to map it." He keyed off the display. "Okay; we're clear."

 "Great." Han threw a glance out to the left. "We're clear of those drop ships, too. They don't have a hope of catching us now.

 "Yes, but that might," Irenez said, pointing at the midrange scope.

 Which showed an Imperial Star Destroyer behind them, already leaving orbit and moving into pursuit.

 "Great," Han growled, kicking in the main drive. Using it this close to the ground wasn't going to do New Cov's plant life any good, but that was the least of his worries at the moment. "Luke?"

 "I see it," Luke's voice came back through the comm speaker. "Any ideas besides running for it?"

 "I think running for it sounds like a great idea," Han said. "Lando?"

 "Calculating the jump now, the other said, busy with the nav computer. "It ought to be ready by the time we're far enough out."

 "There's another ship coming up from below," Luke said. "Right out of the jungle."

 "That's ours," Irenez said, peering over Han's shoulder. "You can parallel them by changing course to one twenty-six mark thirty."

 The Star Destroyer was picking up speed, the scope now showing a wedge of TIE fighters sweeping along ahead of it. "We'd do better to split up," Han said.

 "Nostay with our ship," Irenez said. "Sena said we've got help coming."

 Han took another look at the ship climbing for deep. A small transport, with a fair look of speed but not much else going for it. Another look at the approaching TIE fighters

 "They're going to be in range before we can make the jump," Lando murmured, echoing Han's thought.

 "Yeah. Luke, you still there?"

 "Yes. I think Lando's right."

 "I know. Any way you can pull that Nkllon stunt again? You knowscramble the pilots' minds a little?"

 There was a noticeable hesitation from the comm. "I don't think so," Luke said at last. "Idon't think it's good for me to do that sort of thing. You understand?"

 Han didn't, really, but it probably didn't matter. For a moment he'd forgotten that he wasn't in theFalcon , with a pair of quad lasers and shields and heavy armor. TheLady Luck , for all Lando's modifications, wasn't anything to take on even confused TIE fighter pilots with. "All right, skip it," he told Luke. "Sena just better be right about this help of hers."

 The words were hardly out of his mouth when a flash of brilliant green light shot past theLady Luck 's cockpit canopy. "TIE fighters coming in from portside," Lando snapped.

 "They're trying to cut us off," Luke said. "I'll get rid of them."

 Without waiting for comment, he dropped his X-wing below the Lady Luck's vector and with a roar of main drive swung off to the left toward the incoming TIE fighters. "Watch yourself," Han muttered after him, giving the rear scope another look. The pursuing batch of fighters was still closing fast. "Your ship got any weapons?" he asked Irenez.

 "No, but it's got good armor and plenty of deflector power," she told him. "Maybe you should get ahead of them, let them take the brunt of the attack."

 "Yeah, I'll think about it," Han said, wincing at the woman's ignorance of this kind of fight. TIE pilots didn't much care which ship was first in line when they attacked; and sitting close enough to another ship to hide in its deflector shield was to give up your maneuverability.

 Off to portside, the incoming group of TIE fighters scattered out of the way as Luke drove through their formation, wingtip lasers blazing away madly. A second wave of Imperials behind the first closed to intercept as Luke pulled a hard one-eighty and swung back on the tails of the first wave. Han held his breath; but even as he watched, the X-wing managed somehow to thread its way unscathed through the melee and take off at full throttle at an angle from theLady Luck 's vector, the whole squadron hot on his tail.

 "Well, so much for that group," Irenez commented.

 "And maybe for Luke, too," Lando countered harshly as he jabbed at the comm. "Luke, you all right?"

 "I got a little singed, but everything's still running," Luke's voice came back. "I don't think I can get back to you.

 "Don't try," Han told him. "As soon as you're clear, jump to lightspeed and get out of here."

 "What about you?"

 Luke's last word was partially drowned out by a sudden twitter from the comm. "That's the signal," Irenez said. "Here they come."

 Han frowned, searching the sky outside the front viewport. As far as he could see, there was nothing out there but stars

 And then, in perfect unison, three large ships suddenly dropped out of hyperspace into triangular formation directly ahead of them.

 Lando inhaled sharply. "Those are old Dreadnaught cruisers."

 "That's our help," Irenez said. "Straight down the middle of the trianglethey'll cover for us."

 "Right," Han gritted, shifting theLady Luck 's vector a few degrees, and trying to coax a little more speed out of its engines. The New Republic had a fair number of Dreadnaughts, and at six hundred meters long each they were impressive enough warships. But even three of them working together would be hard pressed to take out an Imperial Star Destroyer.

 Apparently, the Dreadnaughts' commander agreed. Even as the Star Destroyer behind theLady Luck opened up with its huge turbolaser batteries, the Dreadnaughts began pelting the larger ship with a furious barrage of ion cannon blasts, trying to temporarily knock out enough of its systems for them to get away.

 "That answer your question?" Han asked Luke.

 "I think so," Luke said dryly. "Okay, I'm gone. Where do I meet you?"

 "You don't," Han told him. He didn't like that answer much, and he suspected Luke would like it even less. But it couldn't be helped. With a dozen TIE fighters currently between theLady Luck and the X-wing, suggesting a rendezvous point on even what was supposed to be a secure comm channel would be an open invitation for the Empire to send their own reception committee on ahead. "Lando and I can handle the mission on our own," he added. "If we run into any problems, we'll contact you through Coruscant."

 "All right," Luke said. Sure enough, he didn't sound happy about it. But he had enough sense to recognize there was no other safe way. "Take care, you two."

 "See you," Han said, and cut the transmission.

 "So now it'smy mission, too, huh?" Lando growled from the copilot's seat, his tone a mixture of annoyance and resignation. "I knew it. I justknew it."

 Sena's transport was into the triangular pocket between the Dreadnaughts now, still driving for all it was worth. Han kept theLady Luck with them, staying as close above the transport's tail as he could without getting into its exhaust. "You got some particular place you'd like us to drop you?" he asked, looking back at Irenez.

 She was gazing out the viewport at the underside of the Dreadnaught they were passing beneath. "Actually, our Commander was rather hoping you'd accompany us back to our base," she said.

 Han threw a look at Lando. There had been something in her tone that implied the request was more than merely a suggestion. "And just how hard was your Commander hoping this?" Lando asked.

 "Very much." She dropped her gaze from the Dreadnaught. "Don't misunderstandit's not an order. But when I spoke to him, the Commander seemed extremely interested in meeting again with Captain Solo.

 Han frowned. "Again?"

 "Those were his words."

 Han looked at Lando, found the other looking back at him. "Some old friend you've never mentioned?" Lando asked.

 "I don't recall having any friends who own Dreadnaughts," Han countered. "What do you think?"

 "I think I'm being nicely maneuvered into a corner here," Lando said, a little sourly. "Aside from that, whoever this Commander is, he seems to be in contact with your Bothan pals. If you're trying to find out what Fey'lya's up to, he'd be the one to ask."

 Han thought it over. Lando was right, of course. On the other hand, the whole thing could just as easily be a trap, with this talk about old friends being designed to lure him in.

 Still, with Irenez sitting behind him with a blaster riding her hip, there wasn't really a graceful way to get out of it if she and Sena chose to press the point. They might as well be polite about it. "Okay," he told Irenez. "What course do we set?"

 "You don't," she said, nodding upward.

 Han followed her gaze. One of the three Dreadnaughts they'd passed had now swung around to fly parallel with them. Ahead, Sena's ship was heading up toward one of a pair of brightly lit docking ports. "Let me guess," he said to Irenez.

 "Just relax and let us do the flying," she said, with the first hint of humor that he'd yet seen from her.

 "Right," Han sighed.

 And with the flashes of the rear guard battle still going on behind them, he eased theLady Luck up toward the docking port. Luke, he reminded himself had apparently not sensed any treachery from Sena or her people back in the city.

 But then, he hadn't sensed any deceit from the Bimms on Bimmisaari, either, just before that first Noghri attack.

 This time the kid better be right.

 

 The first Dreadnaught gave a flicker of pseudomotion and vanished into hyperspace, taking the transport and theLady Luck with it. A few seconds later, the other two Dreadnaughts ceased their ion bombardment of the Star Destroyer and, through a hail of turbolaser blasts from still-operating Imperial batteries, made their own escape.

 And Luke was alone. Except, of course, for the squadron of TIE fighters still chasing him.

 From behind him came an impatient and rather worried-sounding trill. "Okay, Artoo, we're going," he assured the little droid. Reaching over, he pulled the hyperdrive lever; and the stars became starlines, and turned to mottled sky, and he and Artoo were safe.

 Luke took a deep breath, let it out in a sigh. So that was it.

 Han and Lando were gone, to wherever Sena and her mysterious Commander had taken them, and there really wasn't any way for him to track them down. Until they surfaced again and got in touch with him, he was out of the mission.

 But perhaps that was for the best.

 There was another warble from behind, a questioning one this time. "No, we're not going back to Coruscant, Artoo," he told the droid, an echo of dj view tugging at him. "We're going to a little place called Jomark. To see a Jedi Master."

 

 CHAPTER
9

 The little fast-attack patrol ship had dropped out of hyperspace and closed to within a hundred kilometers of theFalcon before the ship's sensors even noticed its presence. By the time Leia got to the cockpit, the pilot had already made contact.

 "Is that you, Khabarakh?" she called, slipping into the copilot's seat beside Chewbacca.

 "Yes, Lady Vader," the Noghri's gravelly, catlike voice mewed. "I have come alone, as I promised. Are you also alone?"

 "My companion Chewbacca is with me as pilot," she said. "As is a protocol droid. I would like to bring the droid along to help with translation, if I may. Chewbacca, as we agreed, will stay here."

 The Wookiee turned to her with a growl. "No," she said firmly, remembering just in time to mute the transmitter. "I'm sorry, but that was the promise I made to Khabarakh. You'll stay here on theFalcon and that's an order."

 Chewbacca growled again, more insistently this time and with a sudden prickly sensation on the back of her neck, Leia became acutely aware of something she hadn't really thought about for years. Namely, that the Wookiee was quite capable of ignoring pretty much any order he chose to.

 "I have to go alone, Chewie," she said in a low voice. Force of will wasn't going to work here; she was going to have to go for logic and reason. "Don't you understand? That was the arrangement.

 Chewbacca rumbled. "No," Leia shook her head. "My safety isn't a matter of strength anymore. My only chance is to convince the Noghri that I can be trusted. That when I make promises I keep them."

 "The droid will pose no problem," Khabarakh decided. "I will bring my ship alongside for docking."

 Leia switched the transmitter back on. "Fine," she said. "I also have one case of clothing and personal items to bring along, if I may.

 Plus a sensor/analyzer package, to test the air and soil for anything that might be dangerous to me."

 "The air and soil where we shall be is safe."

 "I believe you," Leia said. "But I am not responsible only for my own safety. I carry within me two new lives, and I must protect them."

 The comm speaker hissed. "Heirs of the Lord Vader?"

 Leia hesitated; but genetically, if not philosophically, it was true enough. "Yes.

 Another hiss. "You may bring what you wish," he said. "I must, be allowed to scan them, though. Do you bring weapons?"

 "I have my lightsaber," Leia said. "Are there any animals on your world dangerous enough for me to need a blaster?"

 "Not anymore," Khabarakh said, his voice grim. "Your lightsaber, too, will be acceptable."

 Chewbacca snarled something quietly vicious, his wickedly curved climbing claws sliding involuntarily in and out of their fingertip sheaths. He was, Leia realized abruptly, on the edge of losing control and perhaps of taking matters into those huge hands of his

 "What is the problem?" Khabarakh demanded.

 Leia's stomach tightened.Honesty, she reminded herself. "My pilot doesn't like the idea of me going off alone with you," she conceded. "He has awell, you wouldn't understand."

 "He is under a life debt to you?"

 Leia blinked at the speaker. She hadn't expected Khabarakh to have ever heard of the Wookiee life debt, much less know anything about it. "Yes," she said. "The original life debt was to my husband, Han Solo. During the war Chewie extended it to include my brother and me."

 "And now to the children you bear within you?"

 Leia looked at Chewbacca. "Yes."

 For a long minute the comm was silent. The patrol ship continued toward them, and Leia found herself grip ping the seat arms tightly as she wondered what the Noghri was thinking. If he decided that Chewbacca's objections constituted betrayal of their arrangement

 "The Wookiee code of honor is similar to our own, Thabarakb said at last. "He may come with you."

 Chewbacca gave a throaty rumble of surprise, a surprise that slid quickly into suspicion. "Would you rather he have said you had to stay here?" Leia countered, her own surprise at the Noghri's concession quickly covered up by relief that the whole thing bad been resolved so easily. "Come on, make up your mind."

 The Wookiee rumbled again, but it was clear that he'd rather walk into a trap with her than let her walk into one alone. "Thank you, Khabarakh, we accept," Leia told the Noghri. "We'll be ready whenever you get here. How long will the trip to your world take, by the way?"

 "Approximately four days," Khabarakh said. "I await the honor of your presence aboard my ship."

 The comm went silent. Four days, Leia thought, a shiver running up her back. Four days in which to learn all that she could about both Khabarakh and the Noghri people.

 And to prepare for the most important diplomatic mission of her life.

 

 As it turned out, she didn't learn much about the Noghri culture during the trip. Khabarakh kept largely to himself, splitting his time between the sealed cockpit and his cabin. Occasionally he would come by to talk to Leia, but the conversations were short and invariably left her with the uncomfortable feeling that he was still very ambivalent about his decision to bring her to his home. When they'd set up this meeting back on the Wookiee world of Kashyyyk, she had suggested that he discuss the question with friends or confidants; but as they neared the end of the voyage and his dark nervousness grew, she began to pick up little hints that he had not, in fact, done so. The decision had been made entirely on his own.

 It was not, to her way of thinking, a very auspicious beginning.

 It implied either a lack of trust in his friends or else a desire to absolve them from responsibility should the whole thing go sour.

 Either way, not exactly the sort of situation that filled her with confidence.

 With their host generally keeping to himself, she and Chewbacca were forced to come up with their own entertainment. For Chewbacca, with his innate mechanical interests, such entertainment consisted mainly of wandering through the ship and poking his nose into every room, access hatch, and crawlway he could findstudying the ship, as he ominously put it, in case they needed at some point to fly it themselves. Leia, for her part, spent most of the trip in her cabin with Threepio, trying to deduce a possible derivation ofMal'ary'ush , the only Noghri word she knew, with the hope of at least getting some idea of where in the galaxy they might be going. Unfortunately, with six million languages to draw on, Threepio could come up with any number of possible etymologies for the word, ranging from reasonable to tenuous to absurd and right back again. It was an interesting exercise in applied linguistics, but ultimately more frustrating than useful.

 In the middle of the fourth day, they reached the Noghri world and it was even worse than she'd expected.

 "It's incredible," she breathed, a hard knot forming in her throat as she pressed close to Chewbacca to stare through the ship's only passenger viewport at the world they were rapidly approaching. Beneath the mottling of white clouds the planetary surface seemed to be a uniform brown, relieved only by the occasional deep blue of lakes and small oceans. No greens or yellows, no light purples or bluesnone of the colors, in fact, that usually signified plant life. For all she could tell, the entire planet might have been dead.

 Chewbacca growled a reminder. "Yes, I know Khabarakh said it had been devastated in the war," she agreed soberly. "But I didn't realize he really meant thewhole planet had been hit." She shook her head, feeling sick at heart. Wondering which side had been most responsible for this disaster.

 Most responsible.She swallowed hard at the reflexively defensive words. There was nomost responsible here, and she knew it. Khabarakh's world had been destroyed during a battle in space  and there had been only two sides to the war. Whatever had happened to turn this world into a desert, the Rebel Alliance could not avoid its share of the guilt. "No wonder the Emperor and Vader were able to turn them against us," she murmured. "We have to find some way to help them."

 Chewbacca growled again, gestured out the viewport. The terminator line was coming up over the horizon now, a fuzzy strip of twilight between day and night; and there, fading through to the darkness beyond was what looked like an irregular patch of pale green. "I see it," Leia nodded. "You suppose that's all that's left?"

 The Wookiee shrugged, offered the obvious suggestion. "Yes, I suppose that would be the simplest way to find out," Leia agreed. "I really don't know if I want to ask him, though. Let's wait until we're closer and can see more of"

 She felt Chewbacca go stiff beside her a split second before his bellow split the air and left her ears ringing. "What?"

 And then she saw it, and her stomach knotted abruptly with shock.

 There, just coming over the curve of the planet, was an Imperial Star Destroyer.

 They'd been betrayed.

 "No," she breathed, staring out at the huge arrowhead shape. No mistakeit was a Star Destroyer, all right. "No. I can't believe Khabaralth would do this.

 The last words were spoken to empty air; and with a second shock, she realized that Chewbacca was no longer beside her. Spinning around, she saw a flash of brown as he vanished down the corridor leading to the cockpit.

 "No!" she shouted, pushing away from the bulkhead and taking off after him as fast as she could run. "Chewie, no!"

 The order was a waste of air, and she knew it. The Wookiee had murder in his heart, and he would get to Khabarakh even if he had to tear down the cockpit door with his bare hands.

 The firstclang sounded as she was halfway down the corridor; the second came as she rounded the slight curve and came within sight of the door. Chewbacca was raising his massive fists for a third blow

 When to Leia's amazement, the door slid open.

 Chewbacca seemed surprised, too, but he didn't dwell on it long.

 He was through the door before it was completely open, charging into the cockpit with a ululating Wookiee battle yell. "Chewie!" Leia shouted again, diving through herself.

 Just in time to see Khabakakh, seated at the pilot's station, throw up his right arm and somehow send Chewbacca spinning past him to crash with a roar into the underside of the control board.

 Leia skidded to a halt, not quite believing what she'd just seen.

 "Khabarakh"

 "I did not call them," the Noghri said, half turning to face her. "I did not betray my word of honor."

 Chewbacca thundered his disbelief as he fought to scramble to his feet in the cramped space. "You must stop him," Khabarakh shouted over the Wookiee's roar. "Must keep him quiet. I must give the recognition signal or all will be lost."

 Leia looked past him at the distant Star Destroyer, her teeth clenched hard together.Betrayal but if Thabaraich had planned a betrayal, why had he let Chewbacca come along? Whatever that fighting technique was he'd used to deflect Chewbacca's first mad rush, it wasn't likely to work a second time.

 She focused again on Khabarakh's face; on those dark eyes, protruding jaw, and needle-sharp teeth. He was watching her, ignoring the threat of the enraged Wookiee behind him, his hand poised ready over the comm switch. A beep sounded from the board, and his hand twitched toward the switch before stopping again. The board beeped again "I have not betrayed you, Lady Vader," Khabarakh repeated, a note of urgency in his voice. "You must believe me."

 Leia braced herself. "Chewie, be quiet," she said. "Chewie? Chewie, bequiet ."

 The Wookiee ignored the order Finally back on his feet, he roared his war cry again and lunged for Thabaraldi's throat. The Noghri took the charge head-on this time, grabbing Chewbacca's huge wrists in his wiry hands and holding on for all he was worth.

 It wasn't enough. Slowly but steadily, Khabarakh's arms were bent steadily backwards as Chewbacca forced his way forward. "Chewie, I said stop," Leia tried again. "Use your head-if he was planning a trap, don't you think he'd have timed it for when we were asleep or something?"

 Chewbacca spit out a growl, his hands continuing their unwavering advance. "But if he doesn't check in, they'llknow something's wrong," she countered. "That's a sure way to bring them down on us."

 "The Lady Vader speaks truth," Khabarakh said, his voice taut with the strain of holding back Chewbacca's hands. "I have not betrayed you, but if I give no recognition signal youwill be betrayed."

 "He's right," Leia said. "If they come to investigate, we lose by default. Come on, Chewie, it's our only hope."

 The Wookiee snarled again, shaking his head firmly. "Then you leave me no choice," Khabarakh said.

 And without warning, the cockpit flashed with blue light, dropping Chewbacca to the floor like a huge sack of grain. "What?" Leia gasped, dropping to her knees beside the motionless Wookiee.

 "Khabakakh!"

 "A stun weapon only," the Noghri said, breathing rapidly as he swiveled back to his board. "A built-in defense."

 Leia twisted her head to glare at him, furious at what he'd done a fury that faded reluctantly behind the logic of the situation. Chewbacca had been fully prepared to throttle the life out of Khabarakh; and from personal experience, she knew how hard it was to calm down an angry Wookiee, even when you were his friend to begin with.

 And Khabarakhhad tried talking first. "Now what?"

 she asked the Noghri, digging a hand through Chewbacca's thick torso hair to check his heartbeat. It was steady, which meant the stun weapon hadn't played any of its rare but potentially lethal tricks on the Wookiee's nervous system.

 "Now be silent," Khabarakh said, tapping his comm switch and saying something in his own language. Another mewing Noghri voice replied, and for a few minutes they conversed together. Leia remained kneeling at Chewbacca's side, wishing she'd had time to bring Threepio up before the discussion started. It would have been nice to know what the conversation was all about.

 But finally it ended, and Khabarakh signed off. "We are safe now," be said, slumping a little in his seat. "They are persuaded it was an equipment malfunction."

 "Let's hope so," Leia said.

 Khabarakh looked at her, a strange expression on his nightmare face. "I have not betrayed you, Lady Vader," he said quietly, his voice hard and yet oddly pleading. "You must believe me. I have promised to defend you, and I will. To my own death, if need be."

 Leia stared at him and whether through some sensitivity of the Force or merely her own long diplomatic experience, she finally understood the position Khabarakh was now in. Whatever waverings or second thoughts he might have been feeling during the voyage, the Star Destroyer's unexpected appearance bad burned those uncertainties away. Khabarakh's word of honor had been brought into question and he was now in the position of having to conclusively prove that he had not broken that word.

 And he would have to go to whatever lengths such proof demanded.

 Even if it killed him.

 Earlier, Leia had wondered how Khabarakh could possibly understand the concept of the Wookees life debt. Perhaps the Noghri and Wookiee cultures were more alike than she'd realized.

 "I believe you," she told him, climbing to her feet and sitting down in the copilot seat. Chewbacca she would have to leave where he was until he was awake enough to help her move him. "What now?"

 Khabarakh turned back to his board. "Now we must make a decision," he said. "My intention had been to bring you to ground in the city of Nystao, waiting until full dark to present you to my clan dynast. But that is now impossible. Our Imperial lord has come, and is holding a convocate of the dynasts."

 The back of Leia's neck tingled. "Your Imperial lord is the Grand Admiral?" she asked carefully.

 "Yes," Khabarakh said. "that is his flagship, theChimaera . I remember the day that the Lord Darth Vader first brought him to us," he added, his mewing voice becoming reflective. "The Lord Vader told us that his duties against the Emperor's enemies would now be taking his full attention. That the Grand Admiral would henceforth be our lord and commander." He made a strange, almost purring sound deep in his chest. "There were many who were sad that day. The Lord Vader had been the only one save the Emperor who cared for Noghri well-being. He had given us hope and purpose."

 Leia grimaced. That purpose being to go off and die as death commandos at the Emperor's whim. But she couldn't say things like that to Khabarakh. Not yet, anyway. "Yes," she murmured.

 At her feet, Chewbacca twitched. "He will be fully awake soon," Khabarakh said. "I would not like to stun him again. Can you control him?"

 "I think so," Leia said. They were coming in low toward the upper atmosphere now, on a course that would take them directly beneath the orbiting Star Destroyer. "I hope they don't decide to do a sensor focus on us," she murmured. "If they pick up three life-forms here, you're going to have a lot of explaining to do."

 "The ship's static-damping should prevent that," Khabarakh assured her. "It is at full power."

 Leia frowned. "Aren't they likely to wonder about that?"

 "No. I explained it was part of the same malfunction that caused the transmitter problem."

 There was a low rumble from Chewbacca, and Leia looked down to see the Wookiee's eyes glaring impotently up at her. Fully alert again, but without enough motor control yet to do anything. "We've cleared outer control," she told him. "We're heading down towhereare we going, Khabarakh?"

 The Noghri took a deep breath, let it out in an odd sort of whistle. "We will go to my home, a small village near the edge of the Clean Land. I will hide you there until our lord the Grand Admiral leaves."

 Leia thought about that. A small village situated off the mainstream of Noghri life ought to be safely out of the way of wandering Imperials. On the other hand, if it was anything like the small villages she'd known, her presence there would be common knowledge an hour after they put down. "Can you trust the other villagers to keep quiet?"

 "Do not worry," Khabarakh said. "I will keep you safe."

 But he hesitated before he said itand as they headed into the atmosphere, Leia noted uneasily that he hadn't really answered the question.

 

 The dynast bowed one last time and stepped back to the line of those awaiting their turn to pay homage to their leader. Thrawn, seated in the gleaming High Seat of the Common Room of Honoghr, nodded gravely to the departing clan leader and motioned to the next. The other stepped forward, moving in the formalized dance that seemed to indicate respect, and bowed his forehead to the ground before the Grand Admiral.

 Standing two meters to Thrawn's right and a little behind him, Pellaeon shifted his weight imperceptibly between feet, stifled a yawn, and wondered when this ritual would be over. He'd been under the impression they'd come to Honoghr to try to inspire the commando teams, but so far the only Noghri they'd seen had been ceremonial guards and this small but excessively boring collection of clan leaders. Thrawn presumably had his reasons for wading through the ritual, but Pellaeon wished it would hurry up and be over. With a galaxy still to win back for the Empire, sitting here listening to a group of grayskinned aliens drone on about their loyalty seemed a ridiculous waste of time.

 There was a touch of air on the back of his neck.

 "Captain?" someone said quietly in his earLieutenant Tschel, he tentatively identified the voice. "Excuse me, sir, but Grand Admiral Thrawn asked to be informed immediately if anything out of the ordinary happened."

 Pellaeon nodded slightly, glad of any interruption. "What is it?"

 "It doesn't seem dangerous, sir, or even very important," Tschel said. "A Noghri commando ship on its way in almost didn't give the recognition response in time."

 "Equipment trouble, probably," Pellaeon said.

 "That's what the pilot said," Tschel told him. "The odd thing is that he begged off putting down at the Nystao landing area. You'd think that someone with equipment problems would want his ship looked at immediately."

 "A bad transmitter isn't exactly a crisis-level problem," Pellaeon grunted. But Tschel had a point; and Nystao was the only place on Honoghr with qualified spaceship repair facilities. "We have an ID on the pilot?"

 "Yes, sir. His name's Khabarakh, clan Kihm'bar. I pulled up what we have on him," he added, offering Pellaeon a data pad.

 Surreptitiously, Pellaeon took it, wondering what he should do now. Thrawn had indeed left instructions that he was to be notified of any unusual activity anywhere in the system. But to interrupt the ceremony for something so trivial didn't seem like a good idea.

 As usual, Thrawn was one step ahead of him. Lifting a hand, he stopped the Noghri clan dynast's presentation and turned his glowing red eyes on Pellaeon. "You have something to report, Captain?"

 "A small anomaly only, sir," Pellaeon told him, steeling himself and stepping to the Grand Admiral's side. "An incoming commando ship was slow to transmit its recognition signal, and then declined to put down at the Nystao landing area. Probably just an equipment problem."

 "Probably," Thrawn agreed. "Was the ship scanned for evidence of malfunction?"

 "Ah" Pellaeon checked the data pad. "The scan was inconclusive," he told the other. "The ship's static-damping was strong enough to block"

 "The incoming ship was static-damped?" Thrawn interrupted, looking sharply up at Pellaeon.

 "Yes, sir.

 Wordlessly, Thrawn held up a hand. Pellaeon gave him the data pad, and for a moment the Grand Admiral frowned down at it, skimming the report. "Khabarakh; clan Kihm'bar," he murmured to himself.

 "Interesting." He looked up at Pellaeon again. "Where did the ship go?"

 Pellaeon looked in turn at Tschel. "According to the last report, it was headed south," the lieutenant said. "It might still be in range of our tractor beams, sir.

 Pellaeon turned back to Thrawn. "Shall we try to stop it, Admiral?"

 with Thrawn looked down at the data pad, his face tight concentration. "No," he said at last. "Let it land, but track it. And order a tech team from theChimaera to meet us at the ship's final destination." His eyes searched the line of Noghri dynasts, came to rest on one of them. "Dynast Ir'khaim, clan Kihm'bar, step forward."

 The Noghri did so. "What is your wish, my lord?" he mewed.

 "One of your people has come home," Thrawn said. "We go to his village to welcome him."

 Ir'khaim bowed. "At my lord's request."

 Thrawn stood up. "Order the shuttle to be prepared, Captain," he told Pellaeon. "We leave at once.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, nodding the order on to Lieutenant Thchel. "Wouldn't it be easier, sir. to have the ship and pilot brought here to us?"

 "Easier, perhaps," Thrawn acknowledged, "but possibly not as illuminating. You obviously didn't recognize the pilot's name; but Khabarakh, clan Kihm'bar, was once part of commando team twenty-two.

 Doesthat jog any memories?"

 Pellaeon felt his stomach tighten. "That was the team that went after Leia Organa Solo on Kashyyyk."

 "And of which team only Khabarakh still survives," Thrawn nodded. "I think it might be instructive to hear from him the details of that failed mission. And to find out why it's taken him this long to return home."

 Thrawn's eyes glittered. "And to find out," he added quietly, "just why he's trying so hard to avoid us."

 

 CHAPTER
10

 It was full dark by the time Khabarakh brought the ship to ground in his village, a tight-grouped cluster of huts with brightly lit windows. "Do ships land here often?" Leia asked as Khabarakh pointed the ship toward a shadowy structure standing apart near the center of the village. In the glare of the landing lights the shadow became a large cylindrical building with a flat cone-shaped roof, the circular wall composed of massive vertical wooden pillars alternating with a lighter, shimmery wood. Just beneath the eaves she caught a glint of a metal band encircling the entire building.

 "It is not common," Khabarakh said, cutting the repulsorlifts and running the ship's systems down to standby. "Neither is it unheard of."

 In other words, it was probably going to attract a fair amount of attention. Chewbacca, who had recovered enough for Leia to help into one of the cockpit passenger seats, was obviously thinking along the same lines. "The villagers are all close family of the clan Kihm'bar," Khabarakh said in answer to the Wookiee's slightly slurred question. "They will accept my promise of protection as their own. Come."

 Leia unstrapped and stood up, suppressing a grimace as she did so. But they were here now, and she could only hope that Khabarakh's confidence was more than just the unfounded idealism of youth.

 She helped Chewbacca unstrap and together they followed the Noghri back toward the main hatchway, collecting Threepio from her cabin on the way. "I must go first," Khabarakh said as they reached the exit. "By custom, I must approach alone to thedukha of the clan Kihm'bar upon arrival. By law, I am required to announce out-clan visitors to the head of my family."

 "I understand," Leia said, fighting back a fresh surge of uneasiness. She didn't like this business of Khabarakh having conversations with his fellow Noghri that she wasn't in on. Once again, there wasn't a lot she could do about it. "We'll wait here until you come and get us."

 "I will be quick," Khabarakh promised. He palmed the door release twice, slipping outside as the panel slid open and then shut again.

 Chewbacca growled something unintelligible under his breath. "He'll be back soon," Leia soothed him, making a guess as to what was bothering the Wookiee.

 "I'm certain he is telling the truth," Threepio added helpfully. "Customs and rituals of this sort are very common among the more socially primitive prespaceflight cultures."

 "Except that this culture isn't prespaceflight," Leia pointed out, her hand playing restlessly with the grip of her lightsaber as she stared at the closed hatchway in front of her. Khabarath could at least have left the door open so that they would be able to see when he was coming back.

 Unless, of course, he didn't want them to see when he was coming back.

 "That is evident, Your Highness," Threepio agreed, his voice taking on a professorial tone. "I feel certain, however, that their status in that regard has been changed only recent Well!" he broke off as Chewbacca abruptly pushed past him and lumbered back toward the center of the ship.

 "Where are you going?" Leia called after the Wookiee. His only reply was some comment about the Imperials that she wasn't quite able to catch. "Chewie, get back here," she snapped. "Khabarakh will be back any minute."

 This time the Wookiee didn't bother to answer. "Great," Leia muttered, trying to decide what to do. If Khabarakh came back and found Chewbacca gonebut if he came and foundboth of them gone "As I was saying," Threepio went on, apparently deciding that the actions of rude Wookiees were better left ignored, "all the evidence I have gathered so far about this culture indicates that they were until recently a nonspacefaring people. Khabarakh's reference to thedukha obviously a clan center of some sortthe familial and clan structures themselves, plus this w,hole preoccupation with your perceived royal status"

 "The high court of Alderaan had a royal hierarchy, too," Leia reminded him tartly, still looking back along the empty corridor. No, she decided, she and Threepio had better stay here and wait for Khabarakh. "Most other people in the galaxy didn't consider us to be socially primitive."

 "No, of course not," Threepio said, sounding a little embarrassed. "I didn't mean to imply any such thing."

 "I know," Leia assured him, a little embarrassed herself at jumping on Threepio like that. She'd known what he meant. "Whereis he, anyway?"

 The question had been rhetorical; but even as she voiced it the hatchway abruptly slid open again. "Come," Khabarakh said. His dark eyes flicked over Leia and Threepio "Where is the Wookiee?"

 "He went back into the ship," Leia told him. "I don't know why. Do you want me to go and find him?"

 Khabarakh made a sound halfway between a hiss and a purr. "There is no time," he said. "The maitrakh is waiting. Come."

 Turning, he started back down the ramp. "Any idea how long it will take you to pick up the language?" Leia asked Threepio as they followed.

 "I really cannot say, Your Highness," the droid answered as Khabarakh led them across a dirt courtyard past the large wooden building they'd seen on landingthe clandukha , Leia decided. One of the smaller structures beyond it seemed to be their goal. "Learning an entirely new language would be difficult indeed," Threepio continued. "However, if it is similar to any of the six million forms of communication with which I am familiar"

 "I understand," Leia cut him off. They were almost to the lighted building now; and as they approached, a pair of short Noghri standing in the shadows pulled open the double doors for them. Taking a deep breath, Leia followed Khabarakh inside.

 From the amount of light coming through the windows she would have expected the building's interior to be uncomfortably bright. To her surprise, the room they entered was actually darker than it had been immediately outside. A glance to the side showed why: the brightly lit "windows' were in fact standard self-powered lighting panels, with the operational sides facing outward. Except for a small amount of spillage from the panels, the interior of the building was lit only by a pair of floating-wick lamps. Threepio's assessment of the society echoed through her mind; apparently, he'd known what he was talking about.

 In the center of the room, standing silently in a row facing her, were five Noghri.

 Leia swallowed hard, sensing somehow that the first words should be theirs. Khabarakh stepped to the Noghri in the center and dropped to his knees, ducking his head to the floor and splaying out his hands to his sides. The same gesture of respect, she remembered, that he'd extended to her back in the Kashyyyk holding cell."Ilyr'ush mir lakh svoril'lae," he said."Mir'lae karah siv Mal'ary'ush vir'ae Vader'ush."

 "Can you understand it?" Leia murmured to Threepio.

 "To a degree," the droid replied. "It appears to be a dialect of the ancient trade language"

 "Sha'eah!"the Noghri in the center of the line spat.

 Threepio recoiled. "She said, 'Quiet,"" he translated unnecessarily.

 "I understood the gist," Leia said, drawing herself up and bringing the full weight of her Royal Alderaanian Court upbringing to bear on the aliens facing her. Deference to local custom and authority was all well and good; but she was the daughter of their Lord Darth Vader, and there were certain discourtesies that such a person should not put up with. "Is this how you speak to theMal'ary'ush ?" she demanded.

 Six Noghri heads snapped over to look at her. Reaching out with the Force, Leia tried to read the sense behind those gazes; but as always, this particular alien mind seemed totally closed to her. She was going to have to play it by ear. "I asked a question," she said into the silence.

 The Noghri in the center took a step forward, and with the motion Leia noticed for the first time the two small hard bumps on the alien's upper chest beneath the loose tunic. A female? "Maitrakh?" she murmured to Threepio, remembering the word Khabarakh had used earlier.

 "A female who is leader of a local family or subclan structure," the droid translated, his voice nervous and almost too low to hear. Threepio hated being yelled at.

 "Thank you," Leia said, eyeing the Noghri. "You are the maitrakh of this family?"

 "I am she," the Noghri said in heavily accented but understandable Basic. "What proof do you offer to your claim ofMal'ary'ush ?"

 Silently, Leia held out her hand. The maitrakh hesitated, then stepped up to her and gingerly sniffed it. "Is it not as I said?" Kabarakh asked.

 "Be silent, thirdson," the maitrakh said, raising her head to stare into Leia's eyes. "I greet you, Lady Vader. But I do not welcome you."

 Leia held her gaze steadily. She could still not sense anything from any of the aliens, but with her thoughts extended she could tell that Chewbacca had left the ship and was approaching the house. approaching rather rapidly, and with a definite agitation about him. She hoped he wouldn't charge brashly in and ruin what little civility remained here. "May I ask why not?" she asked the maitrakh.

 "Did you serve the Emperor?" the other countered. "Do you now serve our lord, the Grand Admiral?"

 "No, to both questions," Leia told her.

 "Then you bring discord and poison among us," the maitrakh concluded darkly. "Discord between what was and what now is." She shook her head. "We do not need more discord on Honoghr, Lady Vader."

 The words were barely out of her mouth when the doors behind Leia swung open again and Chewbacca strode into the room. The maitrakh started at the sight of the Wookiee, and one of the other Noghri uttered something startled sounding. But any further reactions were cut off by Chewbacca's snarled warning. "Are you sure they're Imperials?" Leia asked, a cold fist clutching her heart.No, she pleaded silently.Not now. Not yet.

 The Wookiee growled the obvious: that a pair ofLambda -class shuttles coming from orbit and from the direction of the city of Nystao could hardly be anything else.

 Khabarakh moved up beside the maitrakh, said something urgently in his own language. "He says he has sworn protection to us," Threepio translated. "He asks that the pledge be honored."

 For a long moment Leia thought the maitrakh was going to refuse. Then, with a sigh, she bowed her head slightly. "Come with me," Khabarakh said to Leia, brushing past her and Chewbacca to the door. "The maitrakh has agreed to hide you from our lord the Grand Admiral, at least for now."

 "Where are we going?" Leia asked as they followed him out into the night.

 "Your droid and your analysis equipment I will hide among the decon droids that are stored for the night in an outer shed," the Noghri explained, pointing to a windowless building fifty meters away. You and the Wookiee will be more of a problem. If the Imperials have sensor equipment with them, your life-sign profiles will register as different from Noghri."

 "I know," Leia said, searching the sky for the shuttles' running lights and trying to remember everything she could about life-form identification algorithms. Heart rate was one of the parameters, she knew, as were ambient atmosphere, respiratory byproducts, and molecule-chain EM polarization effects. But the chief long-range parameter was "We need a heat source," she told Khabarakh. "As big a one as possible."

 "The bake house," the Noghri said, pointing to a windowless building three down from where they stood. At its back was a squat chimney from which wisps of smoke could be seen curling upward in the backwash of light from the surrounding structures.

 "Sounds like our best chance," Leia agreed. "Khabarakh, you hide Threepio Chewie, come with me."

 

 The Noghri were waiting for them as they stepped from the shuttle: three females standing side by side, with two children acting as honor wardens by the doors of the clandukha building. Thrawn glanced at the group, threw an evaluating sweep around the area, and then turned to Pellaeon. "Wait here until the tech team arrives, Captain," he ordered Pellaeon quietly. "Get them started on a check of the communications and countermeasures equipment in the ship over there. Then join me inside."

 "Yes, sir."

 Thrawn turned to Ir'kbaim. "Dynast," he invited, gesturing at the waiting Noghri. The dynast bowed and strode toward them. Thrawn threw a glance at Rukh, who'd taken Ir'khaim's former position at the Grand Admiral's side, and together they followed. There was the usual welcoming ritual, and then the females led the way into thedukha .

 The shuttle from theChimaera was only a couple of minutes behind them. Pellaeon briefed the tech team and got them busy, then crossed to thedukha and went in.

 He'd expected that the maitrakh would have managed to round up perhaps a handful of her people for this impromptu late-evening visit by their glorious lord and master. To his surprise, he found that the old girl had in fact turned out half the village. There was a double row of them, children as well as adults, lining thedukha walls from the huge genealogy wall chart back to the double doors and around again to the meditation booth opposite the chart. Thrawn was seated in the clan High Seat two thirds of the way to the back of the room with Ir'khaim standing again at his side. The three females who'd met the shuttle stood facing them with a second tier of elders another pace back. Standing with the females, his steelgray skin a marked contrast to their older, darker gray, was a young Noghri male.

 Pellaeon had, apparently, missed nothing more important than a smattering of the nonsense ritual the Noghri never seemed to get enough of. As he moved past the silent lines of aliens to stand at Thrawn's other side, the young male stepped forward and knelt before the High Seat. "I greet you, my lord," he mewed gravely, spreading his arms out to his sides. "You honor my family and the clan Kihm'bar with your presence here."

 "You may rise," Thrawn told him. "You are Khabarakh, clan Kihm'bar?"

 "I am, my lord."

 "You were once a member of the Imperial Noghri commando team twenty-two," Thrawn said. "A team that ceased to exist on the planet Kashyyyk. Tell me what happened."

 Khabarakh might have twitched. Pellaeon couldn't tell for sure. "I filed a report, my lord, immediately upon leaving that world."

 "Yes, I read the report," Thrawn told him coolly. "Read it very carefully, and noted the questions it left unanswered. Such as how and why you survived when all others in your team were killed. And how it was you were able to escape when the entire planet had been alerted to your presence. And why you did not return immediately to either Honoghr or one of our other bases after your failure."

 This time there was definitely a twitch. Possibly a reaction to the wordfailure . "I was left unconscious by the Wookiees during the first attack," Khabarakh said. "I awakened alone and made my way back to the ship. Once there, I deduced what had happened to the rest of the team from official information sources. I suspect they simply were unprepared for the speed and stealth of my ship when I made my escape. As to my whereabouts afterward, my lord" He hesitated. "I transmitted my report, and then left for a time to be alone."

 "Why?"

 "To think, my lord, and to meditate."

 "Wouldn't Honoghr have been a more suitable place for such meditation?" Thrawn asked, waving a hand around thedukha .

 "I had much to think about. My lord."

 For a moment Thrawn eyed him thoughtfully. "You were slow to respond when the request for a recognition signal came from the surface," he said. "You then refused to land at the Nystao port facilities."

 "I did not refuse, my lord. I was never ordered to land there."

 "The distinction is noted," Thrawn said dryly. "Tell me why you chose to come here instead."

 "I wished to speak with my maitrakh To discuss my meditations with her, and to ask forgiveness for my failure."

 "And have you done so?" Thrawn asked, turning to face the maitrakh.

 "We have begun," she said in atrociously mangled Basic. "We have not finished."

 At the back of the room, thedukha doors swung open and one of the tech team stepped inside. "You have a report, Ensign?" Thrawn called to him.

 "Yes, Admiral," the other said, crossing the room and stepping somewhat gingerly around the assembled group of Noghri elders. "We've finished our preliminary set of comm and countermeasures tests, sir, as per orders."

 Thrawn shifted his gaze to Khabarakh. "And?"

 "We think we've located the malfunction, sir. The main transmitter coil seems to have overloaded and backfired into a dump capacitor, damaging several nearby circuits. The compensator computer rebuilt the pathway, but the bypass was close enough to one of the static-damping command lines for the resulting inductance surge to trigger it."

 "An interesting set of coincidences," Thrawn said, his glowing eyes still on Khabarakh. "A natural malfunction, do you think, or an artificial one?"

 The maitrakh stirred, as if about to say something. Thrawn looked at her, and she subsided. "Impossible to say, sir," the tech said, choosing his words carefully. Obviously, he hadn't missed the fact that this was skating him close to the edge of insult in the middle of a group of Noghri who might decide to take offense at it. "Someone who knew what he was doing could probably have pulled it off. I have to say, though, sir, that compensator computers in general have a pretty low reputation among mechanics. They're okay on the really serious stuff that can get unskilled pilots into big trouble, but on noncritical reroutes like this they've always had a tendency to foul up something else along the way."

 "Thank you." If Thrawn was annoyed that he hadn't caught Khabarakh red-handed in a lie, it didn't show in his face. "Your team will take the ship back to Nystao for repairs."

 "Yes, sir." The tech saluted and left.

 Thrawn looked back at Khabarakh. "With your team destroyed, you will of course have to be reassigned," he said. "When your ship has been repaired you will fly it to the Valrar base in Glythe sector and report there for duty."

 "Yes, my lord," Khabarakh said.

 Thrawn stood up. "You have much to be proud of here," he said, inclining his head slightly to the maitrakh. "Your family's service to the clan Kihm'bar and to the Empire will be long remembered by all of Honoghr."

 "As will your leadership and protection of the Noghri people," the maitrakh responded.

 Flanked by Rukh and Ir'khaim, Thrawn stepped down from the chair and headed back toward the double doors. Pellaeon took up the rear, and a minute later they were once again out in the chilly night air. The shuttle was standing ready, and without further comment or ritual Thrawn led the way inside. As they lifted, Pellaeon caught just a glimpse out the viewport of the Noghri filing out of thedukha to watch their departing leaders. "Well,that was pleasant," he muttered under his breath.

 Thrawn looked at him. "A waste of time, you think, Captain?" he asked mildly.

 Pellaeon glanced at Ir'khaim, seated farther toward the front of the shuttle. The dynast didn't seem to be listening to them, but it would probably still pay to be tactful. "Diplomatically, sir, I'm sure it was wortwhile to demonstrate that you care about all of Honoghr, including the outer villages," he told Thrawn. "Given that the commando ship reallyhad malfunctioned, I don't think anything else was gained."

 Thrawn turned to stare out the side viewport. "I'm not so sure of that, Captain," he said. "There's something not quite right back there. Rukh, what's your reading of our young commando Khabarakh?"

 "He was unsettled," the bodyguard told him quietly. "That much I saw in his hands and his face."

 Ir'khaim swiveled around in his chair. "It is a naturally unsettling experience to face the lord of the Noghri," he said.

 "Particularly when one's hands are wet with failure?" Rukh countered.

 Ir'khaim half rose from his seat, and for a pair of heartbeats the air between the two Noghri was thick with tension. Pellaeon felt himself pressing back in his seat cushions, the long and bloody history of Noghri clan rivalry flooding fresh into his consciousness "This mission has generated several failures," Thrawn said calmly into the taut silence. "In that, the clan Kihm'bar hardly stands alone."

 Slowly, Ir'khaim resumed his seat. "Khabarakh is still young," he said.

 "He is indeed," Thrawn agreed. "One reason, I presume, why he's such a bad liar. Rukh, perhaps the Dynast Ir'khaim would enjoy the view from the forward section. Please escort him there."

 "Yes, my lord." Rukh stood up. "Dynast Ir'khaim?" he said, gesturing toward the forward blast door.

 For a moment the other Noghri didn't move. Then, with obvious reluctance, he stood up. "My lord," he said stiffly, and headed down the aisle.

 Thrawn waited until the door had closed on both aliens before turning back to Pellaeon. "Khalarakh is hiding something, Captain," he said, a cold fire in his eyes. "I'm certain of it."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, wondering how the Grand Admiral had come to that conclusion. Certainly the routine sensor scan they'd just run hadn't picked up anything. "Shall I order a sensor focus on the village?"

 "That's not what I meant," Thrawn shook his head. "He wouldn't have brought anything incriminating back to Honoghr with himyou can't hide anything for long in one of these close-knit villages. No, it's something he's not telling us about that missing month. The one where he claims he was off meditating by himself."

 "We might be able to learn something from his ship," Pellaeon suggested.

 "Agreed," Thrawn nodded. "Have a scanning crew go over it before the techs get to work. Every cubic millimeter of it, interior and exterior both. And have Surveillance put someone on Khalarakh."

 "Ahyes, sir," Pellaeon said. "One of our people, or another Noghri?"

 Thrawn cocked an eyebrow at him. "The ridiculously obvious or the heavily political, in other words?" he asked dryly. "Yes, you're right, of course. Let's try a third option: does theChimaera carry any espionage droids?"

 "I don't believe so, sir," Pellaeon said, punching up the question on the shuttle's computer link. "No. We have some Arakyd Viper probe droids, but nothing of the more compact espionage class."

 "Then we'll have to improvise," Thrawn said. "Have Engineering put a Viper motivator into a decon droid and rig it with full-range optical and auditory sensors and a recorder. We'll have it put in with the group working out of Khabarakh's village."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, keying in the order. "Do you want a transmitter installed, too?"

 Thrawn shook his head. "No, a recorder should be sufficient. The antenna would be difficult to conceal from view. The last thing we want is for some curious Noghri to see it and wonder why this one was different."

 Pellaeon nodded his understanding. Especially since that might lead the aliens to start pulling decon droids apart for a look inside. "Yes, sir. I'll have the order placed right away."

 Thrawn's glowing eyes shifted to look out the viewport. "There's no particular rush here," he said thoughtfully. "Not now. This is the calm before the storm, Captain; and until the storm is ready to unleash, we might as well spend our time and energy making sure our illustrious Jedi Master will be willing to assist us when we want him."

 "Which means bringing Leia Organa Solo to him."

 "Exactly." Thrawn looked at the forward blast door. And if my presence is what the Noghri need to inspire them, then my presence is what they'll have."

 "For how long?" Pellaeon asked.

 Thrawn smiled tightly. "For as long as it takes."

 

 CHAPTER
11

 "Han?" Lando's voice came from the cabin intercom beside the bunk. "Wake up."

 "Yeah, I'm awake" Han grunted, swiping at his eyes with one hand and swiveling the repeater displays toward him with the other. If there was one thing his years on the wrong side of the law had hammered into him, it was the knack of going from deep sleep to full alertness in the space between heartbeats. "What's up?"

 "We're here," Lando announced. "Whereverhere is."

 "I'll be right up."

 They were in sight of their target planet by the time he'd dressed and made his way to theLady Luck 's cockpit. "Where's Irenez?" he asked, peering out at the mottled blue-green crescent shape they were rapidly approaching. It looked pretty much like any of a thousand other planets he'd seen.

 "She's gone back to the aft control station," Lando told her. "I got the impression she wanted to be able to send down some recognition codes without us looking over her shoulder."

 "Any idea where we are?"

 "Not really," Lando said. "Transit time was forty seven hours, but that doesn't tell us a whole lot."

 Han nodded, searching his memory. "A Dreadnaught can pull, what, about Point Four?"

 "About that," Lando agreed. "When it's really in a hurry, anyway.

 "Means we aren't any more than a hundred fifty lightyears from New Cov, then."

 "I'd guess we're closer than that, myself," Lando said. "It wouldn't make much sense to use New Cov as a contact point if they were that far away."

 "Unless New Cov was Breil'lya's idea and not theirs," Han pointed out.

 "Possible," Lando said. "I still think we're closer than a hundred fifty light-years, though. They could have taken their time getting here just to mislead us."

 Han looked up at the Dreadnaught that had been hauling them through hyperspace for the past two days. "Or to have time to organize a reception committee."

 "There's that," Lando nodded. "I don't know if I mentioned it, but after they apologized for getting the magnetic coupling off-center over our hatch I went back and took a look"

 "You didn't mention it, but I did the same thing," Han said sourly. "Looked kind of deliberate, didn't it?"

 "That's what I thought, too," Lando said. "Like maybe they wanted an excuse to keep us cooped up down here and not wandering around their ship."

 "Could be lots of good and innocent reasons for that," Han reminded him.

 "And lots of not-so-innocent ones," Lando countered. "You sure you don't have any idea who this Commander of theirs might be?"

 "Not even a guess. Probably be finding out real soon, though."

 The comm crackled on. "Lady Luck, this is Sena," a familiar voice said. "We've arrived."

 "Yes, we noticed," Lando told her. "I expect you'll want us to follow you down."

 "Right," she said. "ThePeregrine will drop the magnetic coupling whenever you're ready to fly."

 Han stared at the speaker, barely hearing Lando's response. A ship called thePeregrine ?

 "You still with me?"

 Han focused on Lando, noticing with mild surprise that the other's conversation with Sena had ended. "Yeah," he said. "Sure. It's justthat name,Peregrine , rang an old bell."

 "You've heard of it?"

 "Not the ship, no," Han shook his head. "The Peregrine was an old Corellian scare legend they used to tell when I was a kid. He was some old ghostly guy who'd been cursed to wander around the world forever and never find his home again. Used to make me feel real creepy.

 From above came a clang; and with a jolt they were free of the Dreadnaught. Lando eased them away from the huge warship, looking up as it passed by overhead. "Well, try to remember it was just a legend," he reminded Han.

 Han looked at the Dreadnaught. "Sure," he said, a little too quickly. "I know that."

 

 They followed Sena's freighter down and were soon skimming over what appeared to be a large grassy plain dotted with patches of stubby coniferous trees. A wall of craggy cliffs loomed directly aheadan ideal spot, Han's old smuggler instincts told him, to hide a spaceship support and servicing base. A few minutes later his bunch was borne out as, sweeping over a low ridge, they came to the encampment.

 An encampment that was far too large to be merely a servicing base. Rows upon rows of camouflaged structures filled the plain just beneath the cliffs: everything from small living quarters to larger admin and supply sheds to still larger maintenance and tool buildings, up to a huge camoroofed refurbishing hangar. The perimeter was dotted with the squat, turret-topped cylinders of Golan Arms anti-infantry batteries and a few of the longer Speizoc anti-vehicle weapons, along with some KAAC Freerunner assault vehicles parked in defensive posture.

 Lando whistled softly under his breath. "Would you look at that?" he said. "What is this, someone's private army?"

 "Looks that way," Han agreed, feeling the skin on the back of his neck starting to crawl. He'd run into private armies before, and they'd never been anything but trouble.

 "I think I'm starting not to like this," Lando decided, easing theLady Luck gingerly over the outer sentry line. Ahead, Sena's freighter was approaching a landing pad barely visible against the rest of the ground. "You sure you want to go through with this?"

 "What, with three Dreadnaughts standing on our heads out there?" Han snorted. "I don't think we've got a whole lot of choice. Not in this crate, anyway.

 "Probably right," Lando conceded, apparently too preoccupied to notice the insult to his ship. "So what do we do?"

 Sena's freighter had dropped its landing skids and was settling onto the pad. "I guess we go down and behave like invited guests," Han said.

 Lando nodded at Han's blaster. "You don't think they'll object to their invited guests coming in armed?"

 "Lot 'em object first," Han said grimly. "Then we'll discuss it."

 Lando put theLady Luck down beside the freighter, and together he and Han made their way to the aft hatchway. Irenez, her transmission chores finished, was waiting there for them, her own blaster strapped prominently to her hip. A transport skiff was parked outside, and as the three of them headed down the ramp, Sena and a handful of her entourage came around theLady Luck 's bow. Most of the others were dressed in a casual tan uniform of an unfamiliar but vaguely Corellian cut; Sena, by contrast, was still in the nondescript civilian garb she'd been wearing on New Cov.

 "Welcome to our base of operations," Sena said, waving a hand to encompass the encampment around them. "If you'll come with us, the Commander is waiting to meet you.

 "Busy looking place you've got here," Han commented as they all boarded the skiff. "You getting ready to start a war or something?"

 "We're not in the business of starting wars," Sena said coolly.

 "Ah," Han nodded, looking around as the driver swung the skiff around and headed off through the camp. There was something about the layout that seemed vaguely familiar.

 Lando got it first. "You know, this place looks a lot like one of the old Alliance bases we used to work out of," he commented to Sena. "Only built on the surface instead of dug in underground."

 "It does look that way, doesn't it?" Sena agreed, her voice not giving anything away.

 "You've had dealings with the Alliance, then?" Lando probed gently.

 Sena didn't answer. Lando looked at han, eyebrows raised. Han shrugged slightly in return. Whatever was going on here, it was clear the hired hands weren't in the habit of talking about it.

 The skiff came to a halt beside an administration building indistinguishable from the others nearby except for the two uniformed guards flanking the doorway. They saluted as Sena approached, one of them reaching over to pull the door open. "The Commander asked to see you for a moment alone, Captain Solo," Sena said, stopping by the open door. "We'll wait out here with General Calrissian."

 "Right," Han said. Taking a deep breath, he stepped inside.

 From its outside appearance he'd expected it to be a standard administrative center, with an outer reception area and a honeycomb of comfy executive offices stacked behind it. To his mild surprise, he found himself instead in a fully equipped war room. Lining the walls were comm and tracking consoles, including at least one crystal gravfield trap receptor and what looked like the ranging control for a KDY v-150 Planet Defender ion cannon like the one the Alliance had had to abandon on Hath. In the center of the room a large holo display showed a sector's worth of stars, with a hundred multicolored markers and vector lines scattered among the glittering white dots.

 And standing beside the holo was a man.

 His face was distorted somewhat by the strangely colored lights playing on it from the display; and it was, at any rate, a face Han had never seen except in pictures. But even so, recognition came with the sudden jolt of an overhead thunderclap. "Senator Bel Iblis," he breathed.

 "Welcome to Peregrine's Nest, Captain Solo," the other said gravely, coming away from the holo toward him.

 "I'm flattered you still remember me.

 "It'd be hard for any Corellian to forget you, sir," Han said, his numbed brain noting vaguely in passing that there were very few people in the galaxy who rated an automaticsir from him. "But you"

 "Were dead?" Bel Iblis suggested, a half smile creasing his lined face.

 "Wellyes," Han floundered. "I mean, everyone thought you died on Anchoron."

 "In a very real sense, I did," the other said quietly, the smile fading from his face. Closer now, Han was struck with just how lined with age and, stress the Senator's face was. "The Emperor wasn't quite able to kill me at Anchoron, but he might just as well have done so. He took everything I had except my life: my family, my profession, even all future contacts with mainstream Corellian society. He forced me outside the law I'd worked so hard to create and maintain." The smile returned, like a hint of sunshine around the edge of a dark cloud. "Forced me to become a rebel. I imagine you understand the feeling."

 "Pretty well, yeah," Han said, grinning lopsidedly in return. He'd read in school about the legendary presence of the equally legendary Senator Garm Bel Iblis; now, he was getting to see that charm up close. It made him feel like a schoolkid again. "I still can't believe this. I wish we'd known soonerwe could really have used this army of yours during the war."

 For just a second a shadow seemed to cross Bel Iblis's face. "We probably couldn't have done much to help," he said. "It's taken us a good deal of time to build up to what you see here." His smile returned. "But there'll be time to talk about that later. Right now, I see you standing there trying to figure out exactly when it was we met."

 Actually, Han had forgotten about Sena's references to a previous meeting. "Tell you the truth, I haven't got a clue," he confessed. "Unless it was after Anchoron and you were in disguise or something."

 Bel Iblis shook his head. "No disguise; but it wasn't something I'd really expect you to remember. I'll give you a hint: you were all of eleven at the time."

 Han blinked. "Eleven?" he echoed. "You mean in school?"

 "Correct," Bel Iblis nodded. "Literally correct, in fact. It was at a convocation at your school, where you were being forced to listen to a group of us old fossils talk about politics."

 Han felt his face warming. The specific memory was still a blank, but thatwas how he'd felt about politicians at that time in his life. Though come to think of it, the opinion hadn't changed all that much over the years. "I'm sorry, but I still don't remember."

 "As I said, I didn't expect you to," Bel Iblis said. "I, on the other hand, remember the incident quite well. During the question period after the talk you asked two irreverently phrased yet highly pointed questions: the first regarding the ethics of the anti-alien bias starting to creep into the legal structure of the Republic, the second about some very specific instances of corruption involving my colleagues in the Senate."

 It was starting to come back, at least in a vague sort of way. "Yeah, I remember now," Han said slowly. "I think one of my friends dared me to throw those questions at you. He probably figured I'd get in trouble for not being, polite. I was in trouble enough that it didn't bother me."

 "Setting your life pattern early, were you?" Bel Iblis suggested dryly. "At any rate, they weren t the sort of questions I would have expected from an eleven-year-old, and they intrigued me enough to ask about you. I've been keeping a somewhat loose eye on you ever since."

 Han grimaced. "You probably weren't very impressed by what you saw.

 "There were times," Bel Iblis agreed. "I'll admit to having been extremely disappointed when you were dismissed from the Imperial Academyyou'd shown considerable promise there, and I felt at the time that a strongly loyal officer corps was one of the few defenses the Republic still had left against the collapse toward Empire." He shrugged. "Under the circumstances, it's just as well that you got out when you did. With your obvious disdain for authority, you'd have been quietly eliminated in the Emperor's purge of those officers he hadn't been able to seduce to his side. And then things would have gone quite differently, wouldn't they?"

 "Maybe a little," Han conceded modestly. He glanced around the war room. "So how long have you been here at-you called it Peregrine's Nest?"

 "Oh, we never stay anywhere for very long," Bel Iblis said, clapping a hand on han's shoulder and gently but firmly turning him toward the door. "Sit still too long and the Imperials will eventually find you. But we can talk business later. Right now, your friend outside is probably getting nervous. Come introduce me to him."

 Lando was indeed looking a little tense as Han and Bel Iblis stepped out into the sunlight again. "It's all right," Han assured him. "We're with friends. Senator, this is Lando Calrissian, one-time general of the Rebel Alliance. Lando; Senator Garm Bel Iblis."

 He hadn't expected Lando to recognize the name of a long-past Corellian politician. He was right. "Senator Bel Iblis," Lando nodded, his voice neutral.

 "Honored to meet you, General Calrissian," Bel Iblis said. "I've heard a great deal about you.

 Lando glanced at Han. "Just Calrissian," he said. "TheGeneral is more a courtesy title now."

 "Then we re even," Bel Iblis smiled. "I'm not a Senator anymore, either." He waved a hand at Sena. "You've met my chief adviser and unofficial ambassador-at-large, Sena Loikvold Midanyl. And" He paused, looking around. "I understood Irenez was with you."

 "She was needed back at the ship, sir," Sena told him. "Our other guest required some soothing."

 "Yes; Council-Aide Breil'lya," Bel Iblis said, glancing in the direction of the landing pad. "This could prove somewhat awkward."

 "Yes, sir," Sena said. "Perhaps I shouldn't have brought him here, but at the time I didn't see any other reasonable course of action."

 "Oh, I agree," Bel Iblis assured her. "Leaving him in the middle of an Imperial raid would have been more than simply awkward."

 Han felt a slight chill run through him. In the flush of excitement over meeting Bel Iblis, he'd completely forgotten what had taken them to New Cov in the first place. "You seem to be on good terms with Breil'lya, Senator," he said carefully.

 Bel Iblis eyed him. "And you'd like to know just what those good terms entail?"

 Han steeled himself. "As a matter of fact, sir yes, I would."

 The other smiled slightly. "You still have that underlying refusal to flinch before authority, don't you. Good. Come on over to the headquarters lounge and I'll tell you anything you want to know." His smile hardened, just a little. "And after that, I'll have some questions to ask you, as well."

 

 The door slid open, and Pellaeon stepped into the darkened antechamber of Thrawn's private command room. Darkened and apparently empty; but Pellaeon knew better than that. "I have important information for the Grand Admiral," he said loudly. "I don't have time for these little games of yours."

 "They are not games," Ruk's gravelly voice mewed right in Pellaeon's ear, making him jump despite his best efforts not to. "Stalking skills must be practiced or lost."

 "Practice on someone else," Pellaeon growled. "I have work to do."

 He stepped forward to the inner door, silently cursing Ruk and the whole Noghri race. Useful tools of the Empire they might well be; but he'd dealt with this kind of close-knit clan structure before, and he'd never found such primitives to be anything but trouble in the long run. The door to the command room slid open

 Revealing a darkness lit only by softly glowing candles.

 Pellaeon stopped abruptly, his mind flashing back to that eerie crypt on Wayland, where a thousand candles marked the graves of off worlders who had come there over the past few years, only to be slaughtered by Joruus C'baoth. For Thrawn to have turned his command room into a duplicate of that

 "No, I haven't come under the influence of our unstable Jedi Master," Thrawn's voice came dryly across the room. Over the candles, Pellaeon could just see the Grand Admiral's glowing red eyes. "Look closer."

 Pellaeon did as instructed, to discover that the "candles" were in fact holographic images of exquisitely delicate lighted sculptures. "Beautiful, aren't they?" Thrawn said, his voice meditative. "They're Corellian flame miniatures, one of that very short list of art forms which others have tried to copy but never truly been able to duplicate. Nothing more than shaped transoptical fibers, pseudoluminescent plant material, and a pair of Goolish light sources, really; and yet, somehow, there's something about them that's never been captured by anyone else." The holographic flames faded away, and in the center of the room a frozen image of three Dreadnaught cruisers apeared. "This was taken by theRelentless two days ago off the planet New Cov, Captain," Thrawn continued in the same thoughtful tone. "Watch closely."

 He started the recording. Pellaeon watched in silence as the Dreadnaughts, in triangular formation, opened fire with ion cannons toward the camera's point of view. Almost hidden in the fury of the assault, a freighter and what looked like a small pleasure yacht could be seen skittering to safety down the middle of the formation. Still firing, the Dreadnaughts began drawing back, and a minute later the whole group had jumped to lightspeed. The holo faded away, and the room lights came up to a gentle glow. "Comments?" Thrawn invited.

 "Looks like our old friends are back," Pellaeon said. "They seem to have recovered from that scare we gave them at Linuri. A nuisance, especially right now.

 "Unfortunately, indications are that they're about to become more than just a nuisance," Thrawn told him. "One of the two ships they were rescuing was identified by theRelentless as theLady Luck . With Han Solo and Lando Calrissian aboard."

 Pellaeon frowned. "Solo and Calrissian? But" He broke off sharply.

 "But they were supposed to go to the Palanhi system," Thrawn finished for him. "Yes. An error on my part. Obviously, something more important came than their concerns for Ackbar's reputation.

 Pellaeon looked back at where the holo had been. "Such as adding new strength to the Rebellion military."

 "I don't believe they've merged quite yet," Thrawn said, his forehead furrowed with thought. "Nor do I believe such an alliance is inevitable. That was a Corellian leading that task force, CaptainI'm sure of that now. And there are only a few possibilities as to just who that Corellian might be."

 A stray memory clicked. "Solo is Corellian, isn't he?"

 "Yes," Thrawn confirmed. "One reason I think they're still in the negotiation stage. If their leader is who I suspect, he might well prefer sounding out a fellow Corellian before making any commitment to the Rebellion's leaders."

 To Thrawn's left, the comm pinged. `Admiral Thrawn? We have the contact you requested with theRelentless ."

 "Thank you," Thrawn said, tapping a switch. In front of the double circle of repeater displays a three-quartersized hologram of an elderly Imperial officer appeared, standing next to what appeared to be a detention block control board. "Grand Admiral," the image said, nodding gravely.

 "Good day, Captain Dorja," Thrawn nodded back.

 "You have the prisoner I asked for?"

 "Right here, sir," Dorja said. He glanced to the side and gestured; and from off-camera a rather bulky human appeared, his hands shackled in front of him, his expression studiously neutral behind his neatly trimmed board. "His name's Niles Ferrier," Dorja said. "We picked him and his crew up during the raid on New Cov."

 "The raid from which Skywalker, Solo, and Calrissian escaped," Thrawn said.

 Dorja winced. "Yes, sir."

 Thrawn shifted his attention to Ferrier. "Captain Ferrier," he nodded. "Our records indicate that you specialize in space ship theft. Yet you were picked up on New Cov with a cargo of biomolecules aboard your ship. Would you care to explain?"

 Ferrier shrugged fractionally. "Palming ships isn't something you can do every day," he said. "It takes opportunities and planning. Taking the occasional shipping job helps make ends meet.

 "You're aware, of course, that the biomolecules were undeclared."

 "Yes, Captain Dorja told me that," Ferrier said with just the right mixture of astonishment and indignation. "Believe me, if I'd known I was being made a party to such cheating against the Empire"

 "I presume you're also aware," Thrawn cut him off, "that for such actions I can not only confiscate your cargo, but also your ship."

 Ferrier was aware of that, all right. Pellaeon could see it in the pinched look around his eyes. "I've been very helpful to the Empire in the past, Admiral," he said evenly. "I've smuggled in loads of contraband from the New Republic, and only recently delivered three Sienar patrol ships to your people."

 "And were paid outrageous sums of money in all cases," Thrawn reminded him. "If you're trying to suggest we owe you for past kindnesses, don't bother. However there may be a way for you to pay back this new debt. Did you happen to notice the ships attacking theRelentless as you were trying to sneak away from the planet?"

 "Of course I did," Ferrier said, a touch of wounded professional pride creeping into his voice. "They were Rendili StarDrive Dreadnaughts. Old ones, by the look of them, but spry enough. Probably undergone a lo of refitting."

 "They have indeed." Thrawn smiled slightly. "I want them."

 It took Ferrier a handful of seconds for the offhanded sounding comment to register. When it did, his mouth dropped open. "You meanme ?"

 "Do you have a problem with that?" Thrawn asked coldly.

 "Uh" Ferrier swallowed. "Admiral, with all due respect"

 "You have three standard months to get me either those ships or else their precise location," Thrawn cut him off. "Captain Dorja?"

 Dorja stepped forward again. "Sir."

 "You will release Captain Ferrier and his crew and supply them with an unmarked Intelligence freighter to use. Their own ship will remain aboard theRelentless until they've completed their mission."

 "Understood," Dorja nodded.

 Thrawn cocked an eyebrow. "One other thing, Captain Ferrier. On the off chance that you might feel yourself tempted to abandon the assignment and make a run for it, the freighter you'll be given will be equipped with an impressive and totally unbreakable doomsday mechanism. With exactly three standard months set on its clock. I trust you understand."

 Above his beard, Ferrier's face had gone a rather sickly white. "Yes," he managed.

 "Good." Thrawn shifted his attention back to Dorja. "I leave the details in your hands, Captain. Keep me informed of developments."

 He tapped a switch, and the hologram faded away. "As I said, Captain," Thrawn said, turning to Pellaon. "I don't think an alliance with the Rebellion is necessarily inevitable."

 "If Ferrier can pull it off"' Pellaeon said doubtfully.

 "He has a reasonable chance," Thrawn assured him. "After all, we have a general idea ourselves of where they might be hidden. We just don't have the time and manpower at the moment to properly root them out. Even if we did, a large-scale attack would probably end up destroying the Dreadnaughts, and I'd rather capture them intact."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said grimly. The wordcapture had reminded him of why he'd come here in the first place. "Admiral, the report on Khabarakh's ship has come in from the scanning team." He held the data card over the double display circle.

 For a moment Thrawn's glowing red eyes burned into Pellaeon's face, as if trying to read the reason for his subordinate's obvious tension. Then, wordlessly, he took the data card from the captain's hand and slid it into his reader. Pellaeon waited, tight-lipped, as the Grand Admiral skimmed the report.

 Thrawn reached the end and leaned back in his seat, his face unreadable. "Wookiee hairs," he said.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded. "All over the ship."

 Thrawn was silent another few heartbeats. "Your interpretation?"

 Pellaeon braced himself "I can only see one, sir. Khabarakh didn't escape from the Wookiees on Kashyyyk at all. They caught him and then let him go."

 "After a month of imprisonment." Thrawn looked up at Pellaeon. "And interrogation."

 "Almost certainly," Pellaeon agreed. "The question is, what did he tell them?"

 "There's one way to find out." Thrawn tapped on the comm. "Hangar bay, this is the Grand Admiral. Prepare my shuttle; I'm going to the surface. I'll want a troop shuttle and double squad of stormtroopers ready to accompany me, plus two flights of Scimitar assault bombers to provide air cover."

 He got an acknowledgment and keyed off. "It may be, Captain, that the Noghri have forgotten where their loyalties lie," he told Pellaeon, standing up and stepping out around the displays. "I think it's time they were reminded that the Empire commands here. You'll return to the bridge and prepare a suitable demonstration."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon hesitated. "Do you want merely a reminder and not actual destruction?"

 Thrawn's eyes blazed. "For the moment, yes," he said, his voice icy. "Let them all pray that I don't change my mind."

 

 CHAPTER
12

 It was the smell Leia noticed first as she drifted slowly awake: a smoky smell, reminiscent of the wood fires of the Ewoks of Endor but with a tangy sharpness all its own. A warm, homey sort of aroma, reminding her of the campouts she'd had as a child on Alderaan.

 And then she woke up enough to remember where she was. Full consciousness flooded in, and she snapped open her eyes

 To find herself lying on a rough pallet in a corner of the Noghri communal bake house. Exactly where she'd been when she'd fallen asleep the night before.

 She sat up, feeling relieved and a little ashamed. What with that unexpected visit last night by the Grand Admiral, she realized she'd half expected to wake up in a Star Destroyer detention cell. Clearly, she'd underestimated the Noghri's ability to stick by their promises.

 Her stomach growled, reminding her it had been a long time since she'd eaten; a little lower down, one of the twins kicked a reminder of his own. "Okay," she soothed. "I get the hint. Breakfast time."

 She tore the top off a ration bar from one of her cases and took a bite, looking around the bake house as she chewed. Against the wall by the door, the double pallet that had been laid out for Chewbacca to sleep on was empty. For a moment the fear of betrayal again whispered to her; but a little concentration through the Force silenced any concerns. Chewbacca was somewhere nearby, with a sense that gave no indication of danger.Relax , she ordered herself sternly, pulling a fresh jumpsuit out of her case and starting to get dressed. Whatever these Noghri were, it was clear they weren't savages. They were honorable people, in their own way, and they wouldn't turn her over to the Empire. At least, not until they'd heard her out.

 She downed the last bite of ration bar and finished dressing, making sure as always that her belt didn't hang too heavily across her increasingly swollen belly. Retrieving her lightsaber from its hiding place under the edge of the pallet, she fastened it prominently to her side. Khabarakh, she remembered, had seemed to find reassurance of her identity in the presence of the Jedi weapon; hopefully, the rest of the Noghri would also respond that way. Stepping to the bake house door, she ran through her Jedi calming exercises and went outside.

 Three small Noghri children were playing with an inflatable ball in the grassy area outside the door, their grayish-white skin glistening with perspiration in the bright morning sunlight. A sunlight that wasn't going to last, Leia saw: a uniform layer of dark clouds extending all the way to the west was even now creeping its way east toward the rising sun. All for the best; a thick layer of clouds would block any direct telescopic observations the Star Destroyer up there might make of the village, as well as diffusing the non-Noghri infrared signatures she and Chewbacca were giving off.

 She looked back down, to find that the three children had halted their game and formed a straight line in front of her. "Hello," she said, trying a smile on them.

 The child in the middle stepped forward and dropped to his knees in an awkward but passable imitation of his elders' gesture of respect. "Male'ary'ush," he mewed. "Miskh 'hara isf chrak 'mi 'sokh. Mires kha."

 "I see," Leia said, wishing fervently that she had Threepio with her. She was just wondering if she should risk calling him on the comlink when the child spoke again. "Hai ghreet yhou,Mal'ary'ush ," he said, the Basic words coming out mangled but understandable. "The maitrakh whaits for you bin thedukha ."

 "Thank you," Leia nodded gravely to him. Door wardens last night; official greeters this morning. Noghri children seemed to be introduced early into the rituals and responsibilities of their culture. "Please escort me to her."

 The child made the respect gesture again and got back to his feet, heading off toward the large circular structure that Khabarakh had landed next to the night before. Leia followed, the other two children taking up positions to either side of her. She found herself throwing short glances at them as they walked, wondering at the light color of their skin. Khabarakh's skin was a steel gray; the maitrakh's had been much darker. Did the Noghri consist of several distinct racial types? Or was the darkening a natural part of their aging process? She made a mental note to ask Khabarakh about it when she had a chance.

 Thedukha , seen now in full daylight, was far more elaborate than she'd realized. The pillars spaced every few meters around the wall seemed to be composed of whole sections of tree trunk, stripped of bark and smoothed to a black marble finish. The shimmery wood that made up the rest of the wall was covered to perhaps half its height with intricate carvings. As they got closer, she could see that the reinforcing metal band that encircled the building just beneath the eaves was also decorated leafily, the Noghri believed in combining function and art. The whole structure was perhaps twenty meters across and four meters high, with another three or four meters for the conical roof and she found herself wondering how many more pillars they'd had to put inside to support the thing.

 Tall double doors had been built into the wall between two of the pillars, flanked at the moment by two straight-backed Noghri children. They pulled open the doors as Leia approached; nodding her thanks, she stepped inside.

 The interior of thedukha was no less impressive than its exterior. It was a single open room, with a thronelike chair two-thirds of the way to the back, a small booth with an angled roof and a dark-meshed window built against the wall between two of the pillars to the right, and a wall chart of some sort directly across from it on the left. There were no internal support pillars; instead, a series of heavy chains had been strung from the top of each of the wall pillars to the edge of a large concave dish hanging over the center of the room. From inside the dishjust inside its rim, Leia decidedhidden lights played upward against the ceiling, providing a softly diffuse illumination.

 A few meters in front of the chart a group of perhaps twenty small children were sitting in a semicircle around Threepio, who was holding forth in their language with what was obviously some kind of story, complete with occasional sound effects. It brought to mind the condensed version of their struggle against the Empire that he'd given the Ewoks, and Leia hoped the droid would remember not to vilify Darth Vader here. Presumably he would; she'd drummed the point into him often enough during the voyage.

 A small movement off to the left caught her eye: Chewbacca and Khabarakh were sitting facing each other on the other side of the door, engaged in some kind of quiet activity that seemed to involve hands and wrists. The Wookiee had paused and was looking questioningly in her direction. Leia nodded her assurance that she was all right, trying to read from his sense just what he and Khabarakh were doing. At least it didn't seem to involve ripping the Noghri's arms out of their sockets; that was something, anyway.

 "Lady Vader," a gravelly Noghri voice said. Leia turned back to see the maitrakh walking up to her. "I greet you. You slept well?"

 "Quite well," Leia told her. "Your hospitality has been most honorable." She looked over at Threepio, wondering if she should call him back to his duties as translator.

 The maitraich misunderstood. "It is the history time for the children," she said. "Your machine graciously volunteered to tell to them the last story of our lord Darth Vader."

 Vader's final, self-sacrificial defiance against the Emperor, with Luke's life hanging in the balance. "Yes," Leia murmured. "It took until the end, but he was finally able to rid himself of the Emperor's web of deception."

 For a moment the maitrakh was silent. Then, she stirred. "Walk with me, Lady Vader."

 She turned and began walking along the wall. Leia joined her, noticing for the first time that thedukha 's inner walls were decorated with carvings, too. A historical record of their family? "My thirdson has gained a new respect for your Wookiee," she said, gesturing toward Chewbacca and Khabarakh. "Our lord the Grand Admiral came last eve seeking proof that my thirdson had deceived him about his flying craft being broken. Because of your Wookiee, he found no such proof."

 Leia nodded. "Yes, Chewie told me last night about gimmicking the ship. I don't have his knowledge of spaceship mechanics, but I know it can't be easy to fake a pair of linked malfunctions the way he did. It's fortunate for all of us he had the foresight and skill to do so."

 "The Wookiee is not of your family or clan," the maitrakh said. "Yet you trust him, as if he were a friend?"

 Leia took a deep breath. "I never knew my true father, the Lord Vader, as I was growing up. I was instead taken to Alderaan and raised by the Viceroy as if I were his own child. On Alderaan, as seems to also be the case here, family relationships were the basis of our culture and society. I grew up memorizing lists of aunts and uncles and cousins, learning how to place them in order of closeness to my adoptive line." She gestured to Chewbacca. "Chewie was once merely a good friend. Now, he is part of my family. As much a part as my husband and brother are.

 They were perhaps a quarter of the way around thedukha before the maitrakh spoke again. "Why have you come here?"

 "Khabarakh told me his people needed help," Leia said simply. "I thought there might be something I could do."

 "Some will say you have come to sow discord among us."

 "You said that yourself last night," Leia reminded her. "I can only give you my word that discord is not my intention."

 The maitrakh made a long hissing sound that ended with a sharp double click of needle teeth. "The goal and the end are not always the same, Lady Vader. Now we serve one overclan only. You would require service to another. This is the seed of discord and death."

 Leia pursed her lips. "Does service to the Empire satisfy you, then?" she asked. "Does it gain your people better life or higher honor?"

 "We serve the Empire as one clan," the maitrakh said. "For you to demand our service would be to bring back the conflicts of old." They had reached the wall chart now, and she gestured a thin hand up toward it. "Do you see our history, Lady Vader?"

 Leia craned her neck to look. Neatly carved lines of alien script covered the bottom two-thirds of the wall, with each word connected to a dozen others in a bewildering crisscross of vertical, horizontal, and angled lines, each cut seemingly of a different width and depth. Then she got it: the chart was a genealogical tree, either of the entire clan Kihm'bar or else just this particular family. "I see it," she said.

 "Then you see the terrible destruction of life created by the conflicts of old," the maitrakh said. She gestured to three or four places on the chart which were, to Leia, indistinguishable from the rest of the design. Reading Noghri genealogies was apparently an acquired skill. "I do not wish to return to those days," the maitrakh continued. "Not even for the daughter of the Lord Darth Vader."

 "I understand," Leia said quietly, shivering as the ghosts of Yavin, Hath, Endor, and a hundred more rose up before her. "I've seen more conflict and death in my lifetime than I ever thought possible. I have no wish to add to the list."

 "Then you must leave," the maitrakh said firmly. "You must leave and not come back while the Empire lives."

 They began to walk again. "Is there no alternative?" Leia asked. "What if I could persuade all of your people to leave their service to the Empire? There would be no conflict then among you."

 "The Emperor aided us when no one else would," the maitrakh reminded her.

 "That was only because we didn't know about your need," Leia said, feeling a twinge of conscience at the half truth. Yes, the Alliance had truly not known about the desperate situation here; and yes, Mon Mothma and the other leaders would certainly have wanted to help if they had. But whether they would have had the resources to actually do anything was another question entirely. "We know now, and we offer you our help."

 "Do you offer us aid for our own sakes?" the maitrakh asked pointedly. "Or merely to wrest our service from the Empire to your overclan? We will not be fought over like a bone among hungrystava ."

 "The Emperor used you," Leia said flatly. "As the Grand Admiral uses you now. Has the aid they've given been worth the sons they've taken from you and sent off to die?"

 They had gone another twenty steps or so before the maitrakh answered. "Our sons have gone," she said softly. "But with their service they have bought us life. You came in a flying craft, Lady Vader. You saw what was done to our land."

 "Yes," Leia said with a shiver. "ItI hadn't realized how widespread the destruction had been."

 "Life on Honoghr has always been a struggle," the maitraldi said. "The land has required much labor to tame. You saw on the history the times when the struggle was lost. But after the battle in the sky"

 She shuddered, a peculiar kind of shaking that seemed to move from her hips upward to her shoulders. "It was like a war between gods. We know now that it was only large flying craft high above the land. But then we knew nothing of such things. Their lightning flashed across the sky, through the night and into the next day, brightening the distant mountains with their fury. And yet, there was no thunder, as if those same gods were too angry even to shout at each other as they fought. I remember being more frightened of the silence than of any other part of it. Only once was there a distant crash like thunder. It was much later before we learned that one of our higher mountains had lost its uppermost peak. Then the lightning stopped, and we dared to hope that the gods had taken their war away from us.

 "Until the ground shake came."

 She paused, another shudder running through her. "The lightning had been the anger of the gods. The groundshake was their war hammer. Whole cities vanished as the ground opened up beneath them. Fire-mountains that had been long quiet sent out flame and smoke that darkened the sky over all the land. Forests and fields burned, as did cities and villages that had survived the ground shake itself. From those who had died came sickness, and still more died after them. It was as if the fury of the sky gods had come among the gods of the land, and they too were fighting among themselves.

 "And then, when finally we dared to hope it was over, the strange-smelling rain began to fall."

 Leia nodded, the whole sequence of events painfully clear. One of the warring ships had crashed, setting off massive earthquakes and releasing toxic chemicals which had been carried by wind and rain to every part of the planet. There were any number of such chemicals in use aboard a modern warship, but it was only the older ships that carried anything as virulent as this chemical must have been.

 Older ships which had been virtually all the Rebel Alliance had had to fight with in the beginning.

 A fresh surge of guilt twisted like a blade in her stomach.We did this , she thought miserably.Our ship. Our fault. "Was it the rain that killed the plants?"

 "The Empire's people had a name for what was in the rain," the maitrakh said. "I do not know what it was."

 "They came soon after the disaster, then. The Lord Vader and the others."

 "Yes." The maitrakh waved her hands to encompass the area around them. "We had gathered together here, all who were left alive and could make the journey. This place had always been a truce ground between clans. We had come here to try to find a way for survival. It was here that the Lord Vader found us."

 They walked in silence for another minute. "Some believed then that he was a god," the maitrakh said. "All feared him and the mighty silver flying craft that had bwught him and his attendants from the sky. But even amid the fear there was anger at what the gods had done to us, and nearly two tens of warriors chose to attack."

 "And were duly slaughtered," Leia said grimly. The thought of effectively unarmed primitives taking on Imperial troops made her wince.

 "They were not slaughtered," the maitrakh retorted, and there was no mistaking the pride in her voice. "Only three of the two tens died in the battle. In turn, they killed many of the Lord Vader's attendants, despite their lightning-weapons and rock-garments. It was only when the Lord Vader himself intervened that the warriors were defeated. But instead of destroying us, as some of the attendants counseled, he instead offered us peace. Peace, and the blessing and aid of the Emperor."

 Leia nodded, one more piece of the puzzle falling into place. She had wondered why the Emperor would have bothered with what to him would have been nothing more than a tiny group of primitive nonhumans. But primitive nonhumans with that kind of natural fighting skill were something else entirely. "What sort of aid did he bring?"

 "All that we needed," the maitrakh said. "Food and medicine and tools came at once. Later, when the strange rain began to kill our crops, he sent the metal droids to begin cleaning the poison from our land."

 Leia winced, freshly aware of her twins' vulnerability. But the analysis kit had found no trace of anything toxic in the air as they approached the village, and Chewbacca and Khabarakh had done similar tests on the soil. Whatever it was that had been in the rain, the decon droids had done a good job of getting rid of it. "And still nothing will grow outside the cleaned land?"

 "Only thekholm-grass ," the maitrakh said. "It is a poor plant, of no use as food. But it alone can grow now, and even it no longer smells as it once did."

 Which explained the uniform brown color that she and Chewbaca had seen from space. Somehow, that particular plant had adapted to the toxic soil. "Did any of the animals survive?" she asked.

 "Some did. Those who could eat thekholm-grass , and those which in turn ate them. But they are few."

 The maitrakh lifted her head, as if looking in her mind's eye toward the distant hills. "This place was never rich with life, Lady Vader. Perhaps that was why the clans had chosen it as a truce ground. But even in so desolate a place' there were still animals and plants without count. They are gone now."

 She straightened up, visibly putting the memory behind her. "The Lord Vader helped us in other ways, as well. He sent attendants to teach our sons and daughters the ways and customs of the Empire. He issued new orders to allow all clans to share the Clean Land, though for all clans to live beside one another this way had never happened since the beginning." She gestured around her. "And he sent mighty flying craft into the desolation, to find and bring to us our clandukhas ."

 She turned her dark eyes to gaze at Leia. "We have an honorable peace, Lady Vader. Whatever the cost, we pay it gladly."

 Across the room, the children had apparently finished their lesson and were getting to their feet. One of them spoke to Threepio, making a sort of truncated version of their facedown bow. The droid replied, and the whole group turned and headed for the door, where two adults awaited them. "Break time?" Leia asked.

 "The clan lessons are over for today," the maitrakh said. "The children must now begin their share of the work of the village. Later, in the evening, they will have the lessons which will equip them to someday serve the Empire."

 Leia shook her head. "It's not right," she told the maitrakh as the children filed out of thedukha . "No people should have to sell their children in return for life."

 The maitraich gave a long hiss. "It is the debt we owe," she said. "How else shall we pay it?"

 Leia squeezed her thumb and forefinger together. How else, indeed? Clearly, the Empire was quite happy with the bargain it had made; and having seen the Noghri commandos in action, she could well understand its satisfaction. They wouldn't be interested in letting the Noghri buy out of their debt in any other way. And if the Noghri themselves considered their service to be a debt of honor to their saviors"I don't know," she had to concede.

 A movement to the side caught her attention: Khabarakh, still sitting on the floor across the room, had fallen over onto his side, with Chewbacca's hand engulfing his wrist. It looked like fighting, except that Chewbacca's sense didn't indicate anger. "Whatare they doing over there?" she asked.

 "Your Wookiee has asked my thirdson to instruct him in our fighting methods," the maitrakh answered, pride again touching her voice. "Wookiees have great strength, but no knowledge of the subtlety of combat."

 It was probably not an assessment the Wookiees themselves would have agreed with. But Leia had to admit that Chewbacca, at least, had always seemed to rely mainly on brute force and bowcaster accuracy. "I'm surprised he was willing to have Khabarakh teach him," she said. "He's never really trusted him."

 "Perhaps it is that same distrust that whets his interest," the maitrakh said dryly.

 Leia had to smile. "Perhaps."

 For a minute they watched in silence as Khabarakh showed Chewbacca two more wrist and arm locks. They seemed to be variants of techniques Leia had learned in her youth on Alderaan, and she shivered once at the thought of those moves with Wookee muscle behind them. "You understand the cycle of our life now, Lady Vader," the maitrakh said quietly. "You must realize that we still hang by spider silk. Even now we do not have enough clean land to grow sufficient food. We must continue to buy from the Empire."

 "Payment for which requires that much more service from your sons." Leia nodded, grimacing. Permanent debtthe oldest form of covert slavery in the galaxy.

 "It also encourages the sending away of our sons," the maitrakh added bitterly. "Even if the Empire allowed it, we could not now bring all our sons home. We would not have food for them."

 Leia nodded again. It was as neat and tidy a box as she'd ever seen anyone trapped in. She should have expected no less from Vader and the Emperor. "You'll never be entirely out of their debt," she told the maitrakh bluntly. "You know that, don't you? As long as you re useful to them, the Grand Admiral will make sure of that."

 "Yes," the maitrakh said softly. "It has taken a long time, but I now believe that. If all Noghri believed so, changes could perhaps be made."

 "But the rest of the Noghri still believe the Empire is their friend?"

 "Not all believe so. But enough." She stopped and gestured upward. "Do you see the starlight, Lady Vader?"

 Leia looked up at the concave dish that hung four meters off the ground at the intersection of the wall support chains. About a meter and a half across, it was composed of some kind of black or blackened metal and perforated with hundreds of tiny pinholes. With the light from the inside rim of the dish winking through like stars, the whole effect was remarkably like a stylized version of the night sky. "I see it."

 "The Noghri have always loved the stars," the maitrakh said, her voice distant and reflective. "Once, long ago, we worshiped them. Even after we knew what they were they remained our friends. There were many among us who would have gladly gone with the Lord Vader, even without our debt, for the joy of traveling among them."

 "I understand," Leia murmured. "Many in the galaxy feel the same way. It's the common birthright of us all."

 "A birthright which we have now lost."

 "Not lost," Leia said, dropping her gaze from the star dish.

 "Only misplaced." She looked over at Khabarakh and Chewbacca. "Perhaps if I talked to all the Noghri leaders at once."

 "What would you say to them?" the maitrakh countered.

 Leia bit at her lip. Whatwould she say? That the Empire was using them? But the Noghri perceived it as a debt of honor. That the Empire was pacing the cleanup job so as to keep them on the edge of self-sufficiency without ever reaching it? But at the rate the decontamination was going she would be hard-pressed to prove any such lagging, even to herself. That she and the New Republic could give the Noghri back their birthright? But why should they believe her?

 "As you see, Lady Vader," the maitraldi said into the silence. "Perhaps matters will someday change. But until then, your presence here is a danger to us as much as to you. I will honor the pledge of protection made by my thirdson, and not reveal your presence to our lord the Grand Admiral. But you must leave."

 Leia took a deep breath. "Yes," she said, the word hurting her throat. She'd had such hopes for her diplomatic and Jedi skills here. Hopes that those skills, plus the accident of her lineage, would enable her to sweep the Noghri out from under the Empire's fist and bring them over to the New Republic.

 And now the contest was over, almost before it had even begun.What in space was I thinking about when I came here? she wondered bleakly. "I will leave," she said aloud, "because I don't wish to bring trouble to you or your family. But the day will come, maitrakh, when your people will see for themselves what the Empire is doing to them. When that happens, remember that I'll always be ready to assist you."

 The maitrakh bowed low. "Perhaps that day will come soon, Lady Vader. I await it, as do others."

 Leia nodded, forcing a smile. Over before it had begun "Then we must make arrangements to"

 She broke off as, across the room, the double doors flew open and one of the child door wardens stumbled inside. "Maitrakh!" he, all but squealed. "Mira'kh soar khee brach'inani vher ahk!"

 Khabarakh was on his feet in an instant; out of the corner of her eye, Leia saw Threepio stiffen. "What is it?" she demanded.

 "It is the flying craft of our lord the Grand Admiral" the maitrakh said, her face and voice suddenly very tired and very alien.

 "And it is coming here."

 

 CHAPTER
13

 For a single heartbeat Leia stared at the maitrakh, her muscles frozen with shock, her mind skidding against the idea as if walking on ice. Noit couldn't be. Itcouldn't . The Grand Admiral had been here just last nightsurely he wouldn't be coming back again. Not so soon.

 And then, in the distance, she heard the faint sound of approaching repulsorlifts, and the paralysis vanished. "We've got to get out of here," she said. "Chewie?"

 "There is no time," Khabarakh called, sprinting to them with Chewbacca right on his heels. "The shuttle must already be in sight beneath the clouds."

 Leia looked quickly around the room, silently cursing her moment of indecision. No windows; no other doors; no cover except the small booth that faced the wall genealogy chart from across thedukha .

 No way out.

 "Are you certain he's coming here?" Leia asked Khabarakh, realizing as she spoke that the question was a waste of breath. "Here to thedukha , I mean?"

 "Where else would he come?" Khabarakh countered darkly, his eyes on the maitrakh. "Perhaps he was not fooled, as we thought."

 Leia looked around thedukha again. If the shuttle landed by the double doors, there would be a few seconds before the Imperials entered when the rear of the building would be out of their view. If she used those seconds to cut them an escape hole with her lightsaber

 Chewbacca's growled suggestion echoed her own train of thought. "Yes, but cutting a hole isn't the problem," she pointed out. "It's how to seal it up afterward."

 The Wookiee growled again, jabbing a massive hand toward the booth. "Well, it'll hide the hole from the inside, anyway, Leia agreed doubtfully. "I suppose that's better than nothing." She looked at the maitrakh, suddenly aware that slicing away part of their ancient clandukha might well qualify as sacrilege. "Maitrakh"

 "If it must be done, then be it so," the Noghri cut her off harshly. She was still in shock her self but even as Leia watched she visibly drew herself together again. "You must not be found here."

 Leia bit at the inside of her lip. She'd seen that same expression several times on Khabarakh's face during the trip from Endor. It was a look she'd come to interpret as regret for his decision to bring her to his home. "We'll be as neat as possible," she assured the maitrakh, pulling her lightsaber from her bolt. "And as soon as the Grand Admiral is gone, Khabarakh can get his ship back and take us away"

 She broke off as Chewbacca snarled for silence. Faintly, in the distance, they could hear the sound of the approaching shuttle; and then, suddenly, another all-too familiar whine shot past thedukha .

 "Scimitar assault bombers," Leia breathed, hearing in the whine the crumbling of her impromptu plan. With Imperial bombers flying cover overhead, it would be impossible for them to sneak out of thedukha without being spotted.

 Which left them only one option. "We'll have to hide in the booth," she told Chewbacca, doing a quick estimation of its size as she hurried toward it. If the slanting roof that sloped upward from the front edge back to thedukha wall wasn't just for show, there should be barely enough room for both her and Chewbacca inside

 "Will you want me in there as well, Your Highness?"

 Leia skidded to a halt, spinning around in shock and chagrin. Threepioshe'd forgotten all about him.

 "There will not be room enough," the maitraich hissed. "Your presence here has betrayed us, Lady Vader"

 "Quiet!" Leia snapped, throwing another desperate look around thedukha . But there was still no other place to hide.

 Unless

 She looked at the star dish hanging over the middle of the room. "We'll have to put him up there," she told Chewbacca, pointing to it. "Do you think you can?"

 There was no need to finish the question. Chewbacca had already grabbed Threepio and was heading at top speed toward the nearest of the tree-trunk pillars, throwing the frantically protesting droid over his shoulder as he ran. The Wookiee leaped upward at the pillar from two meters out, his hidden climbing claws anchoring him solidly to the wood. Three quick pulls got him to the top of the wall; and, with the half hysterical droid balanced precariously, he began to race hand over hand along the chain. "Quiet, Threepio," Leia called to him from the booth door, giving the interior a quick look. The ceiling did indeed follow the slanting roof, giving the back of the booth considerably more height than the front, and there was a low bench like seat across the back wall. A tight fit, but they should make it. "Better yet, shut downthey may have sensors going," she added.

 Though if they did, the whole game was over already. Listening to the approaching whine of repulsorlifts, she could only hope that after the negative sensor scan from the previous night, they wouldn't bother doing another one.

 Chewbaca had reached the center now. Pulling himself partway up on the chain with one hand, he unceremoniously dumped Threepio into the star dish. The droid gave one last screech of protest, a screech that broke off halfway through as the Wookiee reached into the dish and shut him off. Dropping back to the floor with a thud, he hit the ground running as the repulsorlifts outside went silent.

 "Hurry!" Leia hissed, holding the door open for him. Chewbacca made it across thedukha and dived through the narrow opening, jumping up on the bench and turning around to face forward, his head jammed up against the sloping ceiling and his legs spread to both sides of the bench. Leia slid in behind him, sitting down in the narrow gap between the Wookiee's legs.

 There was just enough time to ease the door closed before the double doors a quarter of the way around thedukha slammed open.

 Leia pressed against the back wall of the booth and Chewbacca's legs, forcing herself to breathe slowly and quietly and running through the Jedi sensory enhancement techniques Luke had taught her. From above her Chewbacca's breathing rasped in her ears, the heat from his body flowing like an invisible waterfall onto her head and shoulders. She was suddenly and acutely aware of the weight and bulge of her belly and of the small movements of the twins within it; of the hardness of the bench she was sitting on; of the intermingling smells of Wookiee hair, the alien wood around her, and her own sweat. Behind her, through the wall of thedukha , she could hear the sound of purposeful footsteps and the occasional clink of laser rifles against stormtrooper armor, and said silent thanks that they'd scrubbed her earlier plan of trying to escape that way.

 And from the inside of thedukha , she could hear voices.

 "Good morning, maitrakh," a calm, coolly modulated voice said. "I see that your thirdson, Khabarakh, is here with you. How very convenient."

 Leia shivered, the rough rubbing of her tunic against her skin horribly loud in her ears. That voice had the unmistakable tone of an Imperial commander, but with a calmness and sheer weight of authority behind it. An authority that surpassed even the smug condescension she'd faced from Governor Tarkin aboard the Death Star.

 It could only be the Grand Admiral.

 "I greet you, my lord," the maitrakh's voice mewed, her own tone rigidly controlled. "We are honored by your visit."

 "Thank you," the Grand Admiral said, his tone still polite but with a new edge of steel beneath it. "And you, Khabarakh clan Kihm'bar. Are you also pleased at my presence here?"

 Slowly, carefully, Leia eased her head to the right, hoping to get a look at the newcomer through the dark mesh of the booth window. No good; they were all still over by the double doors, and she didn't dare get her face too close to the mesh. But even as she eased back to her previous position there was the sound of measured footstepsand a moment later, in the center of thedukha , the Grand Admiral came into view.

 Leia stared at him through the mesh, an icy chill running straight through her. She'd heard Han's description of the man he'd seen on Myrkrthe pale blue skin, the glowing red eyes, the white Imperial uniform. She'd heard, too, Fey'lya's casual dismissal of the man as an impostor, or at best a self-promoted Moff. And she'd wondered privately if Han might indeed have been mistaken.

 She knew now that he hadn't been.

 "Of course, my lord," Khabarakh answered the Grand Admiral's question. "Why should I not be?"

 "Do you speak to your lord the Grand Admiral in such a tone?" an unfamiliar Noghri voice demanded.

 "I apologize," Khabarakh said. "I did not mean disrespect."

 Leia winced. Undoubtedly not; but the damage was already done. Even with her relative inexperience of the subtleties of Noghri speech, the words had sounded too quick and too defensive. To the Grand Admiral, who knew this race far better than she did

 "What thendid you mean?" the Grand Admiral asked, turning around to face Khabarakh and the maitrakh.

 "I" Khabarakh floundered. The Grand Admiral stood silently, waiting. "I am sorry, my lord," Khabarakh finally got out. "I was overawed by your visit to our simple village."

 "An obvious excuse," the Grand Admiral said. "Possibly even a believable oneexcept that you weren't overawed by my visit last night." He cocked an eyebrow. "Or is it that you didn't expect to face me again so soon?"

 "My lord"

 "What is the Noghri penalty for lying to the lord of your overclan?" the Grand Admiral interrupted, his cool voice suddenly harsh. "Is it death, as it was in the old days? Or do the Noghri no longer prize such outdated concepts as honor?"

 "My lord has no right to bring such accusations against a son of the clan Kihm'bar," the maitrakh spoke up stiffly.

 The Grand Admiral shifted his gaze slightly. "You would be well advised to keep your counsel to yourself, maitrakh. This particular son of the clan Kihm'bar has lied to me, and I do not take such matters lightly." The glowing gaze shifted back. "Tell me, Khabarakh clan Kihm'bar, about your imprisonment on Kashyyyk."

 Leia squeezed her lightsaber hard, the cool metal ridges of the grip biting into the palm of her hand. It had been during Khabarakh's brief imprisonment on Kashyyyk that he'd been persuaded to bring her here to Honoghr. If Khabarakh blurted out the whole story

 "I do not understand," Khabarakh said.

 "Really?" the Grand Admiral countered. "Then allow me to refresh your memory. You didn't escape from Kashyyyk as you stated in your report and repeated last night in my presence and in the presence of your family and your clan dynast. You were, in fact, captured by the Wookiees after the failure of your mission. And you spent that missing month not meditating, but undergoing interrogation in a Wookiee prison. Does that help your memory any?"

 Leia took a careful breath, not daring to believe what she was hearing. However it was the Grand Admiral had learned about Khabarakh's capture, he'd taken that fact and run in exactly the wrong direction with it. They'd been given a second chance if Khabarakh could, hold on to his wits and poise a little longer.

 Perhaps the maitrakh didn't trust his stamina, either. "My thirdson would not lie about such matters, my lord," she said before Khabarakh could reply. "He has always understood the duties and requirements of honor."

 "Has he, now," the Grand Admiral shot back. "A Noghri commando, captured by the enemy for interrogationand still alive? Is this the duty and requirement of honor?"

 "I was not captured, my lord," Khabarakh said stiffly. "My escape from Kashyyyk was as I said it."

 For a half dozen heartbeats the Grand Admiral gazed in his direction in silence. "And I say that you lie, Khabarakh clan Kihm'bar," he said softly. "But no matter. With or without your cooperation I will have the truth about your missing month and whatever the price was you paid for your freedom. Rukh?"

 "My lord," the third Noghri voice said.

 "Khabarakh clan Kihm'bar is hereby placed under Imperial arrest. You and Squad Two will escort him aboard the troop shuttle and take him back to theChimaera for interrogation."

 There was a sharp hiss. "My lord, this is a violation"

 "You will be silent, maitrakh," the Grand Admiral cut her off. "Or you will share in his imprisonment."

 "I will not be silent," the maitrakh snarled. "A Noghri accused of treason to the overclan must be given over to the clan dynasts for the ancient rules of discovery and judgment. It is the law."

 "I am not bound by Noghri law," the Grand Admiral said coldly. "Khabarakh has been a traitor to the Empire. By Imperial rules will he be judged and condemned."

 "The clan dynasts will demand"

 "The clan dynasts are in no position to demand anything," the Grand Admiral barked, touching the comlink cylinder pocketed beside his tunic insignia. "Do you require a reminder of what it means to defy the Empire?"

 Leia heard the faint sound of the maitrakh's sigh. "No, my lord," she said, her voice conceding defeat.

 The Grand Admiral studied her. "You shall have one anyway.

 He touched his comlink again

 And abruptly the interior of thedukha flashed with a blinding burst of green light.

 Leia jerked her head back into Chewbacca's legs, squeezing her eyelids shut against the sudden searing pain ripping through her eyes and face. For a single, horrifying second she thought that thedukha had taken a direct hit, a turbolaser blast powerful enough to bring the whole structure down in flaming ruin around them. But the afterimage burned into her retina showed the Grand Admiral still standing proud and unmoved; and belatedly she understood.

 She was trying desperately to reverse her sensory enhancement when the thunderclap slammed like the slap of an angry Wookiee into the side of her head.

 She would later have a vague recollection of several more turbolaser blasts, seen and heard only dimly through the thick gray haze that clouded over her mind, as the orbiting Star Destroyer fired again and again into the hills surrounding the village. By the time her throbbing head finally dragged her back to full consciousness the Grand Admiral's reminder was over, the final thunderclap roiling away into the distance.

 Cautiously, she opened her eyes, squinting a little against the pain. The Grand Admiral was still standing where he'd been, in the center of thedukha and as the last thunderclap faded into silence he spoke. "Iam the law on Honoghr now, maitrakh," he said, his voice quiet and deadly. "If I choose to follow the ancient laws, I will follow them. If I choose to ignore them, they will be ignored. Is that clear?"

 The voice, when it came, was almost too alien to recognize. If the purpose of the Grand Admiral's demonstration had been to frighten the maitrakh half out of her mind, it had clearly succeeded. "Yes, my lord."

 "Good." The Grand Admiral let the brittle silence hang in the air for another moment. "For loyal servants of the Empire, however, I am prepared to make compromises. Khabarakh will be interrogated aboard theChimaera ; but before that, I will allow the first stage of the ancient laws of discovery." His head turned slightly. "Rukh, you will remove Khabarath clan Kihm'bar to the center of Nystao and present him to the clan dynasts. Perhaps three days of public shaming will serve to remind the Noghri people that we are still at war."

 "Yes, my lord."

 There was the sound of footsteps, and the opening and closing of the double doors. Hunched against the ceiling above her, his sense in unreadable turmoil, Chewbacca rumbled softly to himself. Leia clenched her teeth, hard enough to send flashes of pain through her still throbbing head. Public shaming and something called the laws of discovery.

 The Rebel Alliance had unwittingly destroyed Honoghr. Now, it seemed, she was going to do the same to Khabarakh.

 The Grand Admiral was still standing in the middle of thedukha . "You are very quiet, maitrakh," he said.

 "My lord ordered me to be silent," she countered.

 "Of course." He studied her. "Loyalty to one's clan and family is all well and good, maitrakh. But to extend that loyalty to a traitor would he foolish. As well as potentially disastrous to your family and clan."

 "I have not heard evidence that my thirdson is a traitor."

 The Grand Admiral's lip twitched. "You will," he promised softly.

 He walked toward the double doors, passing out of Leia's sight, and there was the sound of the doors opening. The footsteps paused, clearly waiting; and a moment later the quieter paces of the maitrakh joined him. Both left, the doors dosed again, and Leia and Chewbacca were alone.

 Alone. In enemy territory. Without a ship. And with their only ally about to undergo an Imperial interrogation. "I think, Chewie," she said softly, "we're in trouble."

 

 CHAPTER
14

 One of the first minor truths about interstellar flight that any observant traveler learned was that a planet seen from space almost never looked anything at all like the official maps of it. Scatterings of cloud cover, shadows from mountain ranges, contour-altering effects of large vegetation tracts, and lighting tricks in general, all combined to disguise and distort the nice clean computer-scrubbed lines drawn by the cartographers. It was an effect that had probably caused a lot of bad moments for neophyte navigators, as well as supplying the ammunition for innumerable practical jokes played on those same neophytes by their more experienced shipmates.

 It was therefore something of a surprise to find that, on this particular day and coming in from this particular angle, the major continent of the planet Jomark did indeed look almost exactly like a precisely detailed map. Of course, in all fairness, it was a pretty small continent to begin with.

 Somewhere on that picture-perfect continent was a Jedi Master.

 Luke tapped his fingers gently on the edge of his control board, gazing out at the greenish-brown chunk of in is X-wing's canopy. He could sense Jedi's presencehad been able to sense it, in fact, since first dropping out of hyperspacebut so far he'd been unable to make a more direct contact.Master C'baoth? he called silently, trying one more time.This is Luke Skywalker. Can you hear me?

 There was no response. Either Luke wasn't doing it right, or C'baoth was unable to reply or else this was a deliberate test of Luke's abilities.

 Well, he was game. "Let's do a sensor focus on the main continent, Artoo," he called, looking over his displays and trying to put himself into the frame of mind of a Jedi Master who'd been out of circulation for a while. The bulk of Jomark's land area was in that one small continentnot much more than an oversized island, reallybut there were also thousands of much smaller islands scattered in clusters around the vast ocean. Taken all together, there were probably close to three hundred thousand square kilometers of dry land, which made for an awful lot of places to guess wrong. "Scan for technology, and see if you can pick out the main population centers."

 Artoo whistled softly to himself as he ran the X-wing's sensor readings through his programmed life-form algorithms. He gave a series of beeps, and a pattern of dots appeared superimposed on the scope image. "Thanks," Luke said, studying it. Not surprisingly, most of the population seemed to be living along the coast. But there were a handful of other, smaller centers in the interior, as well. Including what seemed to be a cluster of villages near the southern shore of an almost perfectly ring-shaped lake.

 He frowned at the image, keyed for a contour overlay. It wasn't just an ordinary lake, he saw now, but one that had formed inside what was left of a cone-shaped mountain, with a smaller cone making a large island in the center. Probably volcanic in origin, given the mountainous terrain around it.

 A wilderness region thick with mountains, where a Jedi Master could have lived in privacy for a long time. And a cluster of villages nearby where he could have emerged from his isolation when he was finally ready to do so.

 It was as good a place to start as any. "Okay, Artoo, here's the landing target," he told the droid, marking it on his scope. "I'll take us down; you watch the sensors and let me know if you spot anything interesting."

 Artoo beeped a somewhat nervous question. "Yes, or anything suspicious," Luke agreed. Artoo had never fully believed that the Imperial attack on them the last time they'd tried to come here had been purely coincidence.

 They dropped in through the atmosphere, switching to repulsorlifts about halfway down and leveling off just below the tops of the highest mountains. Seen up close, the territory was rugged enough but not nearly as desolate as Luke had first thought. Vegetation was rich down in the valley areas between mountains, though it was sparse on the rocky sides of the mountains themselves. Most of the gaps they flew over seemed to have at least a couple of houses nestled into them, and occasionally even a village that had been too small for the X-wing's limited sensors to notice.

 They were coming up on the lake from the southwest when Artoo spotted the mansion perched up on the rim.

 "Never seen a design like that before," Luke commented. "You getting any life readings from it?"

 Artoo warbled a moment: inconclusive. "Well, let's give it a try," Luke decided, keying in the landing cycle. "If we're wrong, at least it'll be a downhill walk to everywhere else."

 The mansion was set into a small courtyard bordered by a fence that appeared more suited for decoration than defense. Killing the X-wing's forward velocity, he swung the ship parallel to the fence and set it down a few meters outside its single gate. He was in the process of shutting down the systems when Artoo's trilled warning made him look up again.

 Standing just outside the gate, watching them, was the figure of a man.

 Luke gazed at him, heart starting to beat a little harder. The man was old, obviouslythe gray-white hair and long beard that the mountain winds were blowing half across his lined face were evidence enough of that. But his eyes were keenly alert, his posture straight and proud and unaffected by even the harder gusts of wind, and the halfopen brown robe revealed a chest that was strongly muscled.

 "Finish shutting down, Artoo," Luke said, hearing the slight quaver in his voice as he slipped off his helmet and popped the X-wing's canopy. Standing up, he vaulted lightly over the cockpit side to the ground.

 The old man hadn't moved. Taking a deep breath, Luke walked over to him. "Master C'baoth," he said, bowing his head slightly. "I'm Luke Skywalker."

 The other smiled faintly. "Yes," he said. "I know. Welcome to Jomark."

 "Thank you," Luke said, letting his breath out in a quiet sigh. At last. It had been a long and circuitous journey, what with the unscheduled stopovers at Myrkr and Sluis Van. But at last he'd made it.

 C'baoth might have been reading his mind. Perhaps he was. "I expected you long before now," he said reproachfully.

 "Yes, sir," Luke said. "I'm sorry. Circumstances lately have been rather out of my control."

 "Why?" C'baoth countered.

 The question took Luke by surprise. "I don't understand."

 The other's eyes narrowed slightly. "What do you mean, you don't understand?" he demanded. "Are you or are you not a Jedi?"

 "Well, yes"

 "Then you should be in control," C'baoth said firmly. "In control of yourselt, in control of the people and events around you. Always."

 "Yes, Master," Luke said cautiously, trying to hide his confusion. The only other Jedi Master he'd ever known had been Yoda but Yoda had never talked like this.

 For another moment C'baoth seemed to study him. Then, abruptly, the hardness in his face vanished. "But you've come," he said, the lines in his face shifting as he smiled. "That's the important thing. They weren't able to stop you."

 "No," Luke said. "They tried, though. I must have gone through four Imperial attacks since I first started out this way."

 C'baoth looked at him sharply. "Did you, now. Were they directed specifically at you?"

 "One of them was," Luke said. "For the others I just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Or maybe the right place at the right time," he corrected.

 The sharp look faded from C'baoth's face, replaced by something distant. "Yes," he murmured, gazing into the distance toward the edge of the cliff and the ring-shaped lake far below. "The wrong place at the wrong time. The epitaph of so many Jedi." He looked back at Luke. "The Empire destroyed them, you know."

 "Yes, I know," Luke said. "They were hunted down by the Emperor and Darth Vader.

 "And one or two other Dark Jedi with them," C'baoth said grimly, his gaze turned inward. "Dark Jedi like Vader. I fought the last of them on" He broke off, shaking his head slowly. "So long ago."

 Luke nodded uncomfortably, feeling as if he was standing in loose sand. All these strange topic and mood shifts were hard to follow. A result of C'baoth's isolation? Or was this another test, this time of Luke's patience? "A long time ago," he agreed. "But the Jedi can live again. We have a chance to rebuild."

 C'baoth's attention returned to him. "Your sister," he said. "Yes. She'll be giving birth to Jedi twins soon."

 "Potential Jedi, anyway," Luke said, a little surprised that C'baoth had heard about Leia's pregnancy. The New Republic's publicists had given the news wide dissemination, but he'd have thought Jomark too far out of the mainstream to have picked up on it. "The twins are the reason I came here, in fact."

 "No," C'baoth said. "The reason you came here was because I called you."

 "Wellyes. But"

 "There are nobuts , Jedi Skywalker," C'baoth cut him off sharply. "To be a Jedi is to be a servant of the Force. I called you through the Force; and when the Force calls, you must obey."

 "I understand," Luke nodded again, wishing that he really did. Was C'baoth just being figurative? Or was this yet another topic his training had skipped over? He was familiar enough with the general controlling aspects of the Force; they were what kept him alive every time he matched his lightsaber against blaster fire. But a literal "call" was something else entirely. "When you say the Force calls you, Master C'baoth, do you mean?"

 "There are two reasons why I called you," C'baoth interrupted him again. "First, to complete your training. And second because I need your help."

 Luke blinked. "My help?"

 C'baoth smiled wanly, his eyes suddenly very tired. "I am nearing the end of my life, Jedi Skywalker. Soon now I will be making that long journey from this life to what lies beyond."

 A lump caught in Luke's throat. "I'm sorry," was all he could think of to say.

 "It's the way of all life," C'baoth shrugged. "For Jedi as well as for lesser beings."

 Luke's memory flicked back to Yoda, lying on his deathbed in his Dagobah homeand his own feeling of helplessness that he could do nothing but watch. It was not an experience he really wanted to go through again. "How can I help?" he asked quietly.

 "By learning from me," C'baoth said. "Open yourself to me; absorb from me my wisdom and experience and power. In this way will you carry on my life and work."

 "I see," Luke nodded, wondering exactly what work the other was referring to. "You understand, though, that I have work of my own to do"

 "And are you prepared to do it?" C'baoth said, arching his eyebrows. "Fullyprepared? Or did you come here with nothing to ask of me?"

 "Well, actually, yes," Luke had to admit. "I came on behalf of the New Republic, to ask your assistance in the fight against the Empire."

 "To what end?"

 Luke frowned. He'd have thought the reasons self evident. "The elimination of the Empire's tyranny. The establishment of freedom and justice for all the beings of the galaxy."

 "Justice." C'baoth's lip twisted. "Do not look to lesser beings for justice, Jedi Skywalker." He slapped himself twice on the chest, two quick movements of his fingertips. "We are the true justice of this galaxy. We two, and the new legacy of Jedi that we will forge to follow us. Leave the petty battles to others, and prepare yourself for that future."

 "I" Luke floundered, searching for a response to that.

 "What is it your sister's unborn twins need?" C'baoth demanded.

 "They needwell, they're someday going to need a teacher," Luke told him, the words coming out with a strange reluctance. First impressions were always dicey, he knew; but right now he wasn't at all sure that this was the sort of man he wanted to be teaching his niece and nephew. C'baoth seemed to be too mercurial, almost on the edge of instability. "It's sort of been assumed that I'd be teaching them when they're old enough, like I'm teaching Leia. The problem is that just being a Jedi doesn't necessarily mean you can be a good teacher." He hesitated. "Obi-wan Kenobi blamed himself for Vader's turn to the dark side. I don't want that to happen to Leia's children. I thought maybe you could teach me the proper methods of Jedi instruction"

 "A waste of time," C'baoth said with an off handed shrug. "Bring them here. I'll teach them myself."

 "Yes, Master," Luke said, picking his words carefully. "I appreciate the offer. But as you said, you have your own work to do. All I really need are some pointers"

 "And what of you, Jedi Skywalker?" C'baoth interrupted him again. "Have you yourself no need of further instruction? In matters of judgment, perhaps?"

 Luke gritted his teeth. This whole conversation was leaving him feeling a lot more transparent than he really liked. "Yes, I could use some more instruction in that area," he conceded. "I think sometimes that the Jedi Master who taught me expected me to pick that up on my own.

 "It's merely a matter of listening to the Force," C'baoth said briskly. For a moment his eyes seemed to unfocus; then they came back again. "But come. We will go down to the villages and I will show you."

 Luke felt his eyebrows go up. "Right now?"

 "Why not?" C'baoth shrugged. "I have summoned a driver; he will meet us on the road." His gaze shifted to something over Luke's shoulder. "Nostay there," he snapped.

 Luke turned. Artoo had raised himself out of the X-wing's droid socket and was easing his way along the upper hull. "That's just my droid," he told C'baoth.

 "He will stay where he is," C'baoth bit out. "Droids are an abominationcreations that reason, but yet are not genuinely part of the Force."

 Luke frowned. Droids were indeed unique in that way, but that was hardly a reason to label them as abominations. But this wasn't the time or the place to argue the point. "I'll go help him back into his socket," he soothed C'baoth, hurrying back to the ship. Drawing on the Force, he leaped up to the hull beside Artoo. "Sorry, Artoo, but you're going to have to stay here," he told the droid. "Come onlet's get you back in."

 Artoo beeped indignantly. "I know, and I'm sorry," Luke said, herding the squat metal cylinder back to its socket. "But Master C'baoth doesn't want you coming along. You might as well wait here as on the groundat least this way you'll have the X-wing's computer to talk to."

 The droid warbled again, a plaintive and slightly nervous sound this time. "No, I don't think there's any danger," Luke assured him. "If you're worried, you can keep an eye on me through the X-wing's sensors." He lowered his voice to a murmur. "And while you're at it, I want you to start doing a complete sensor scan of the area. See if you can find any vegetation that seems to be distorted, like that twisted tree growing over the dark side cave on Dagobah. Okay?"

 Artoo gave a somewhat bemused acknowledging beep. "Good. See you later," Luke said and dropped back to the ground. "I'm ready," he told C'baoth.

 The other nodded. "This way," he said, and strode off along a path leading downward.

 Luke hurried to catch up. It was, he knew, something of a long shot: even if the spot he was looking for was within Artoo's sensor range, there was no guarantee that the droid would be able to distinguish healthy alien plants from unhealthy ones. But it was worth a try. Yoda, he had long suspected, had managed to stay hidden from the Emperor and Vader only because the dark side cave near his home had somehow shielded his own influence on the Force. For C'baoth to have remained unnoticed, it followed that Jomark must also have a similar focus of dark side power somewhere.

 Unless, of course, hehadn't gone unnoticed. Perhaps the Emperor had known all about him, but had deliberately left him alone.

 Which would in turn imply what?

 Luke didn't know. But it was something he had better find out.

 

 They had walked no more than two hundred meters when the driver and vehicle C'baoth had summoned arrived: a tall, lanky man on an old SoroSuub recreational speeder bike pulling an elaborate wheeled carriage behind it. "Not much more than a converted farm cart, I'm afraid," C'baoth said as he ushered Luke into the carriage and got in beside him. Most of the vehicle seemed to be made of wood, but the seats were comfortably padded. "The people of Chynoo built it for me when I first came to them."

 The driver got the vehicles turned aroundno mean trick on the narrow pathand started downward. "How long were you alone before that?" Luke asked.

 C'baoth shook his head. "I don't know," he said. "Time was not something I was really concerned with. I lived, I thought, I meditated. That was all."

 "Do you remember when it was you first came here?" Luke persisted. "After the Outbound Flight mission, I mean.

 Slowly, C'baoth turned to face him, his eyes icy. "Your thoughts betray you, Jedi Skywalker," he said coldly. "You seek reassurance that I was not a servant of the Emperor."

 Luke forced himself to meet that gaze. "The Master who instructed me told me that I was the last of the Jedi," he said. "He wasn't counting Vader and the Emperor in that list."

 "And you fear that I'm a Dark Jedi, as they were?"

 "Are you?"

 C'baoth smiled; and to Luke's surprise, actually chuckled. It was a strange sound, coming out of that intense face. "Come now, Jedi Skywalker," he said. "Do you really believe that Joruus C'baothJoruus C'baoth would ever turn to the dark side?"

 The smile faded. "The Emperor didn't destroy me, Jedi Skywalker, for the simple reason that during most of his reign I was beyond his reach. And after I returned"

 He shook his head sharply. "There is another, you know. Another besides your sister. Not a Jedi; not yet. But I've felt the ripples in the Force. Rising, and then falling."

 "Yes, I know who you're talking about," Luke said. "I've met her."

 C'baoth turned to him, his eyes glistening. "You'vemet her?" he breathed.

 "Well, I think I have," Luke amended. "I suppose it's possible there's someone else out there who"

 "What is her name?"

 Luke frowned, searching C'baoth's face and trying unsuccessfully to read his sense. There was something there he didn't like at all. "She called herself Mara Jade," he said.

 C'baoth leaned back into the seat cushions, eyes focused on nothing. "Mara Jade," he repeated the name softly.

 "Tell me more about the Outbound Flight project," Luke said, determined not to get dragged off the topic. "You set off from Yoga Minor, remember, searching for other life outside the galaxy. What happened to the ship and the other Jedi Masters who were with you?"

 C'baoth's eyes took on a faraway look. "They died, of course, he said, his voice distant. "All of them died. I alone survived to return." He looked suddenly at Luke. "It changed me, you know."

 "I understand," Luke said quietly. So that was why C'baoth seemed so strange. Something had happened to him on that flight "Tell me about it."

 For a long moment C'baoth was silent. Luke waited, jostled by the bumps as the carriage wheels ran over the uneven ground. "No," C'baoth said at last, shaking his head. "Not now. Perhaps later." He nodded toward the front of the carriage. "We are here."

 Luke looked. Ahead he could see half a dozen small houses, with more becoming visible as the carriage cleared the cover of the trees. Probably fifty or so all told: small, neat little cottages that seemed to combine natural building elements with selected bits of more modern technology. About twenty people could be seen moving about at various tasks; most stopped what they were doing as the speeder bike and carnage appeared. The driver pulled to roughly the center of the village and stopped in front of a thronelike chair of polished wood protected by a small, dome-roofed pavilion.

 "I had it brought down from the High Castle," C'baoth explained, gesturing to the chair. "I suspect it was a symbol of authority to the beings who carved it."

 "What's it used for now?" Luke asked. The elaborate throne seemed out of place, somehow, in such a casually rustic setting as this.

 "It's from there that I usually give my justice to the people," C'baoth said, standing up and stepping out of the carriage. "But we will not be so formal today. Come."

 The people were still standing motionless, watching them. Luke reached out with the Force as he stepped out beside C'baoth, trying to read their overall sense. It seemed expectant, perhaps a little surprised, definitely awed. There didn't seem to be any fear; but there was nothing like affection, either. "How long have you been coming here?" he asked C'baoth.

 "Less than a year," C'baoth said, setting off casually down the street. "They were slow to accept my wisdom, but eventually I persuaded them to do so."

 The villagers were starting to return to their tasks now, but their eyes still followed the visitors. "What do you mean, persuaded them?" Luke asked.

 "I showed them that it was in their best interests to listen to me." C'baoth gestured to the cottage just ahead. "Reach out your senses, Jedi Skywalker. Tell me about that house and its inhabitants."

 It was instantly apparent what C'baoth was referring to. Even without focusing his attention on the place Luke could feel the anger and hostility boiling out of it. There was a flicker of something like murderous intent "Uh-oh," he said. "Do you think we should?"

 "Of course we should," C'baoth said. "Come." He stepped up to the cottage and pushed open the door Keeping his hand on his lightsaber, Luke followed.

 There were two men standing in the room, one holding a large knife toward the other, both frozen in place as they stared at the intruders. "Put the knife down, Tarm," C'baoth said sternly. "Svan, you will likewise lay aside your weapon.

 Slowly, the man with the knife laid it on the floor. The other looked at C'baoth, back at his now unarmed opponent"I said lay it aside!" C'baoth snapped.

 The man cringed back, hastily pulled a small slugthrower from his pocket and dropped it beside the knife. "Better," C'baoth said, his voice calm but with a hint of the fire still there. "Now explain yourselves."

 The story came out in a rush from both men at once, a loud and confusing babble of charges and countercharges about some kind of business deal gone sour. C'baoth listened silently, apparently having no trouble following the windstorm of fact and assumption and accusation. Luke waited beside him, wondering how he was ever going to untangle the whole thing. As near as he could understand it, both men seemed to have equally valid arguments.

 Finally, the men ran out of words. "Very well," C'baoth said. "The judgment of C'baoth is that Svan will pay to Tarm the full wages agreed upon." He nodded at each man in turn. "The judgment will be carried out immediately."

 Luke looked at C'baoth in surprise. "That's all?" he asked.

 C'baoth turned a steely gaze on him. "You have something to say?"

 Luke glanced back at the two villagers, acutely aware that arguing the ruling in front of them might undermine whatever authority C'baoth had built up here. "I just thought that more of a compromise might be in order."

 "There is no compromise to be made," C'baoth said firmly. "Svan is at fault, and he will pay."

 "Yes, but"

 Luke caught the flicker of sense a half second before Svan dived for the slugthrower. With a single smooth motion he had his lightsaber free of his belt and ignited. But C'baoth was faster. Even as Luke's green-white blade snapped into existence, C'baoth raised his hand; and from his fingertips flashed a sizzling volley of all-too-well-remembered blue lightning bolts.

 Svan took the blast full in the head and chest, snapping over backwards with a scream of agony. He slammed into the ground, screaming again as C'baoth sent a second blast at him. The slugthrower flew from his hand, its metal surrounded for an instant by a blue-white coronal discharge.

 C'baoth lowered his hand, and for a long moment the only sound in the room was a soft whimpering from the man on the floor. Luke stared at him in horror, the smell of ozone wrenching at his stomach. "C'baoth!"

 "You will address me asMaster ," the other cut him off quietly.

 Luke took a deep breath, forcing calm into his mind and voice. Closing down his lightsaber, he returned it to his belt and went over to kneel beside the groaning man. He was obviously still hurting, but aside from some angry red burns on his chest and arms, he didn't seem to be seriously hurt. Laying his hand gently on the worst of the burns, Luke reached out with the Force, doing what he could to alleviate the other's pain.

 "Jedi Skywalker," C'baoth said from behind him. "He is not permanently damaged. Come away.

 Luke didn't move. "He's in pain."

 "That is as it should be," C'baoth said. "He required a lesson, and pain is the one teacher no one will ignore. Now come away."

 For a moment Luke considered disobeying. Svan's face and sense were in agony

 "Or would you have preferred that Tarm lie dead now?" C'baoth added.

 Luke looked at the slugthrower lying on the floor, then at Tarm standing stiffly with wide eyes and face the color of dirty snow. "There were other ways to stop him," Luke said, getting to his feet.

 "But none that he will remember longer." C'baoth locked eyes with Luke. "Remember that, Jedi Skywalker; remember it well. For if you allow your justice to be forgotten, you will be forced to repeat the same lessons again and again."

 He held Luke's gaze a pair of heartbeats longer before turning back to the door. "We're finished here. Come."

 

 The stars were blazing overhead as Luke eased open the low gate of the High Castle and stepped out of the courtyard. Artoo had clearly noticed his approach; as he closed the gate behind him the droid turned on the X-wing's landing lights, illuminating his path. "Hi, Artoo," Luke said, walking to the short ladder and wearily pulling himself up into the cockpit. "I just came out to see how you and the ship were doing."

 Artoo beeped his assurance that everything was fine. "Good," Luke said, flicking on the scopes and keying for a status check anyway. "Any luck with the sensor scan I asked for?"

 The reply this time was less optimistic. "That bad, huh?" Luke nodded heavily as the translation of Artoo's answer scrolled across the X-wing's computer scope. "Well, that's what happens when you get up into mountains."

 Artoo grunted, a distinctly unenthusiastic sound, then warbled a question. "I don't know," Luke told him. "A few more days at least. Maybe longer, if he needs me to stay." He sighed. "I don't know, Artoo. I mean, it's just never what I expect. I went to Dagobah expecting to find a great warrior, and I found Master Yoda. I came here expecting to find someone like Master Yodaand instead I got Master C'baoth."

 Artoo gave a slightly disparaging gurgle, and Luke had to smile at the translation. "Yes, well, don't forget that Master Yoda gave you a hard time that first evening, too," he reminded the droid, wincing a little himself at the memory. Yoda had also given Luke a hard time at that encounter. It had been a test of Luke's patience and of his treatment of strangers.

 And Luke had flunked it. Rather miserably.

 Artoo warbled a point of distinction. "No, you're right," Luke had to concede. "Even while he was still testing us Yoda never had the kind of hard edge that C'baoth does."

 He leaned back against his headrest, staring past the open canopy at the mountaintops and the distant stars beyond them. He was wearywearier than he'd been, probably, since the height of that last climactic battle against the Emperor. It had been all he could do to come out here to check on Artoo. "I don't know, Artoo. He hurt someone today. Hurt him a lot. And he pushed his way into an argument without being invited, and then forced an arbitrary judgment on the people involved, and" He waved a hand helplessly. "I just can't see Ben or Master Yoda acting that way. But he's a Jedi, just like they were. So which example am I supposed to follow?"

 The droid seemed to digest that. Then, almost reluctantly, he trilled again. "That's the obvious question," Luke agreed. "But why would a Dark Jedi of C'baoth's power bother playing games like this? Why not just kill me and be done with it?"

 Artoo gave an electronic grunt, a list of possible reasons scrolling across the screen. A rather lengthy listclearly, the droid had put a lot of time and thought into the question. "I appreciate your concern, Artoo," Luke soothed him. "But I really don't think he's a Dark Jedi. He's erratic and moody, but he doesn't have the same sort of evil aura about him that I could sense in Vader and the Emperor." He hesitated. This wasn't going to be easy to say. "I think it's more likely that Master C'baoth is insane."

 It was possibly the first time Luke had ever seen Artoo actually startled speechless. For a minute the only sound was the whispering of the mountain winds playing through the spindly trees surrounding the High Castle. Luke stared at the stars and waited for Artoo to find his voice.

 Eventually, the droid did. "No, I don't know for sure how something like that could happen," Luke admitted as the question appeared on his screen. "But I've got an idea."

 He reached up to lace his fingers behind his neck, the movement easing the pressure in his chest. The dull fatigue in his mind seemed to be matched by an equally dull ache in his muscles, the kind he sometimes got if he went through an overly strenuous workout. Dimly, he wondered if there was something in the air that the X-wing's biosensors hadn't picked up on. "You never knew, but right after Ben was cut downback on the first Death StarI found out that I could sometimes hear his voice in the back of my mind. By the time the Alliance was driven off Hath, I could see him, too."

 Artoo twittered. "Yes, that's who I sometimes talked to on Dagobah," Luke confirmed. "And then right after the Battle of Endor, I was able to see not only Ben but Yoda and my father, too. Though the other two never spoke, and I never saw them again. My guess is that there's some way for a dying Jedi tooh, I don't know; to somehow anchor himself to another Jedi who's close by."

 Artoo seemed to consider that, pointed out a possible flaw in the reasoning. "I didn't say it was the tightest theory in the galaxy," Luke growled at him, a glimmer of annoyance peeking through his fatigue. "Maybe I'm way off the mark. But if I'm not, it's possible that the five other Jedi Masters from the Outbound Flight project wound up anchored to Master C'baoth."

 Artoo whistled thoughtfully. "Right," Luke agreed ruefully. "It didn't bother me any to have Ben aroundin fact, I wish he had talked to me more often. But Master C'baoth was a lot more powerful than I was. Maybe it was different with him."

 Artoo made a little moan, and another, rather worried suggestion appeared on the screen. "I can't just leave him, Artoo," Luke shook his head tiredly. "Not with him like this. Not when there's a chance I can help him."

 He grimaced, hearing in the words a painful echo of the past. Darth Vader, too, had needed help, and Luke had similarly taken on the job of saving him from the dark side. And had nearly gotten himself killed in the process.What am I doing? he wondered silently. I'm not a healer. Why do I keep trying to be one?

 Luke?

 With an effort, Luke dragged his thoughts back to the present. "I've got to go," he said, levering himself out of the cockpit seat. "Master C'baoth's calling me.

 He shut down the displays, but not before the translation of Artoo's worried jabbering scrolled across the computer display. "Relax, Artoo," Luke told him, leaning back over the open cockpit canopy to pat the droid reassuringly. "I'll be all right. I'm a Jedi, remember? You just keep a good eye on things out here. Okay?"

 The droid trilled mournfully as Luke dropped down the ladder and onto the ground. He paused there, looking at the dark mansion, lit only by the backwash of the X-wing's landing lights. Wondering if maybe Artoo was right about them getting out of here.

 Because the droid had a good point. Luke's talents didn't lean toward the healing aspects of the forcethat much he was pretty sure of. Helping C'baoth was going to be a long, time consuming process, with no guarantee of success at the end of the road. With a Grand Admiral in command of the Empire, political infighting in the New Republic, and the whole galaxy hanging in the balance, was this really the most efficient use of his time?

 He raised his eyes from the mansion to the dark shadows of the rim mountains surrounding the lake below. Snowcapped in places, barely visible in the faint light of Jomark's three tiny moons, they were reminiscent somehow of the Manarai Mountains south of the Imperial City on Coruscant. And with that memory came another one: Luke, standing on the Imperial Palace rooftop gazing at those other mountains, sagely explaining to Threepio that a Jedi couldn't get so caught up in galactic matters that he was no longer concerned about individual people.

 The speech had sounded high and noble when he'd given it. This was his chance to prove that it hadn't been just words.

 Taking a deep breath, he headed back toward the gate.

 

 CHAPTER
15

 "Tangrene was our real crowning achievement," Senator Bel Iblis said, draining the last of his glass and raising it high above his head. Across the expansive but largely empty headquarters lounge the bartender nodded in silent acknowledgment and busied himself with his drinks dispenser. "We'd been sniping at the Imperials for probably three years at that point," Bel Iblis continued. "Hitting small bases and military supply shipments and generally making as much trouble for them as we could. But up till Tangrene they weren't paying much attention to us."

 "What happened at Tangrene?" Han asked.

 "We blasted a major Ubiqtorate center into fine powder," Bel Iblis told him with obvious satisfaction. "And then waltzed out right under the collective nose of the three Star Destroyers that were supposed to be guarding the place. I think that was when they finally woke up to the fact that we were more than just a minor irritant. That we were a group to be taken seriously."

 "I'll bet they did," Han agreed, shaking his head in admiration. Even getting within sight of one of Imperial Intelligence's Ubiqtorate bases was a tricky job, let alone blasting it and getting out again. "What did it cost you?"

 "Amazingly enough, we got all five warships out," Bel Iblis said. "There was a fair amount of damage all around, of course, and one of them was completely out of commission for nearly seven months. But it was worth it."

 "I thought you said you had six Dreadnaughts," Lando spoke up.

 "We have six now," Bel Iblis nodded. "At the time we only had five."

 "Ah," Lando said, and lapsed back into silence.

 "So after that was when you started moving your base around?" Han asked.

 Bel Iblis eyed Lando a moment longer before turning back to Han. "That was when mobility became a top priority, yes," he corrected. "Though we hadn't exactly been sitting still before that. This place is, what, our thirteenth location in seven years, Sena?"

 "Fourteenth," Sena said. "That's if you count Womrik and the Mattri asteroid bases."

 "Fourteen, then," Bel Iblis nodded. "You probably noticed that every building here is built of hi-state memory plastic. Makes it relatively simple to fold everything up and toss it aboard the transports." He chuckled. "Though that's ben known to backfire on us. Once on Lelmra we got hit by a violent thunderstorm, and the lightning strikes were hitting so close to us that the edge currents triggered the flip-flop on a couple of barracks buildings and a targeting center. Folded them up neat as a set of birthday presents, with nearly fifty people still inside."

 "That was terrific fun," Sena put in dryly. "No one was killed, fortunately, but it took us the better part of the night to cut them all free. With the storm still blazing on around us."

 "Things finally quieted down just before daylight," Bel Iblis said. "We were out of there by the next evening. Ah."

 The bartender had arrived with the next round of drinks. Twistlers, Bel Iblis had called them: a blend of Corellian brandy with some unidentified but very tart fruit extract. Not the sort of drink Han would have expected to find in a military camp, but not bad either. The Senator took two of the drinks off the tray and handed them across to Han and Sena; took the other two off

 "I'm still good, thanks," Lando said before Bel Iblis could offer him one.

 Han frowned across the table at his friend. Lando was sitting stiffly in his lounge chair, his face impassive, his glass still half full. Hisfirst glass, Han realized suddenlyLando hadn't had a refill in the hour and a half since Bel Iblis had brought them here. He caught Lando's eye, raised his eyebrows fractionally. Lando looked back, his expression still stony, then dropped his gaze and took a small sip of his drink.

 "It was about a month after Tangrene," Bel Iblis went on, "that we first met Borsk Fey'lya."

 Han turned back to him, feeling a twitch of guilt. He'd gotten so wrapped up in Bel Iblis's storytelling that he'd completely forgotten why he and Lando had set off on this mission in the first place. Probably that was what had Lando glaring crushed ice in his direction. "YeahFey'lya," he said. "What's your deal with him?"

 "Considerably less of a deal than he'd like, I assure you," Bel Iblis said. "Fey'lya did us some favors during the height of the war years, and he seems to think we should be more grateful for them."

 "What sort of favors?" Lando asked.

 "Small ones," Bel Iblis told him. "Early on he helped us set up a supply line through New Cov, and he whistled up some Star Cruisers once when the Imperials started nosing around the system at an awkward moment. He and some of the other Bothans also shifted various funds to us, which enabled us to buy equipment sooner than we otherwise would have. That sort of thing."

 "So how grateful are you?" Lando persisted.

 Bel Iblis smiled slightly. "Or in other words, what exactly does Fey'lya want from me?"

 Lando didn't smile back. "That'll do for starters," he agreed.

 "Lando," Han said warningly.

 "No, that's all right," Bel Iblis said, his own smile fading. "Before I answer, though, I'd like you to tell me a little about the New Republic hierarchy. Mon Mothma's position in the new government, Fey'lya's relationship to herthat sort of thing."

 Han shrugged. "That's pretty much public record."

 "That's the official version," Bel Iblis said. "I'm asking what things arereally like."

 Han glanced over at Lando. "I don't understand," he said.

 Bel Iblis took a swallow of his Twistler. "Well, then, let me be more direct," he said, studying the liquid in his glass. "What's Mon Mothma really up to?"

 Han felt a trickle of anger in his throat. "Is that what Breil'lya told you?" he demanded. "That she's up to something?"

 Bel Iblis raised his eyes over the rim of his glass. "This has nothing to do with the Bothans," he said quietly. "It's about Mon Mothma. Period."

 Han looked back at him, forcing down his confusion as he tried to collect his thoughts. There were things he didn't like about Mon Mothmaa lot of things, when you came right down to it. Starting with the way she kept running Leia off her feet doing diplomacy stuff instead of letting her concentrate on her Jedi training. And there were other things, too, that drove him crazy. But when you came right down to it "As far as I know," he told Bel Iblis evenly, "the only thing she's trying to do is put together a new government."

 "With herself at its head?"

 "Shouldn't she be?"

 A shadow of something seemed to cross Bel Iblis's face, and he dropped his eyes to his glass again. "I suppose it was inevitable," he murmured. For a moment he was silent. Then he looked up again, seeming to shake himself out of the mood. "So you'd say that you're becoming a republic in fact as well as in name?"

 "I'd say that, yes," Han nodded. "What does this have to do with Fey'lya?"

 Bel Iblis shrugged. "It's Fey'lya's belief that Mon Mothma wields altogether too much power," he said. "I presume you'd disagree with that assessment?"

 Han hesitated. "I don't know," he conceded. "But she sure isn't running the whole show, like she did during the war.

 "The war's still going on," Bel Iblis reminded him.

 "Yeah. Well"

 "What does Fey'lya think ought to be done about it?" Lando spoke up.

 Bel Iblis's lip twitched. "Oh, Fey'lya has some rather personal and highly unsurprising ideas about the reapportionment of power. But that's Bothans for you. Give them a sniff of the soup pot and they climb all over each other to be in charge of the ladle."

 "Especially when they can claim to have been valued allies of the winning side," Lando said. "Unlike others I could mention."

 Sena stirred in her seat; but before she could say anything, Bel Iblis waved a hand at her. "You're wondering why I didn't join the Alliance," he said calmly. "Why I chose instead to run my own private war against the Empire."

 "That's right," Lando said, matching his tone. "I am.

 Bel Iblis gave him a long, measuring look. "I could give you several reasons why I felt it was better for us to remain independent," he said at last. "Security, for one. There was a great deal of communication going on between various units of the Alliance, with a correspondingly large potential for interception of that information by the Empire. For a while it seemed like every fifth Rebel base was being lost to the Imperials through sheer sloppiness in security."

 "We had some problems," Han conceded. "But they've been pretty well fixed."

 "Have they?" Bel Iblis countered. "What about this information leak I understand you have right in the Imperial Palace?"

 "Yeah, we know it's there," Han said, feeling strangely like a kid who's been called on the carpet for not finishing his homework. "We've got people looking into it."

 "They'd better do more than just look," Bel Iblis warned. "If our analysis of Imperial communique's is correct, this leak has its own nameDelta Sourceand is furthermore reporting personally to the Grand Admiral."

 "Okay," Lando said. "Security. Let's hear some of the other reasons."

 "Ease off, Lando," Han said, glaring across the table at his friend. "This isn't a trial, or"

 He broke off at a gesture from Bel Iblis. "Thank you, Solo, but I'm quite capable of defending my own actions," the Senator said. "And I'll be more than happy to do so when I feel the time is right for such a discussion."

 He looked at Lando, then at his watch. "But right now, I have other duties to attend to. It's getting late, and I know you really haven't had time to relax since landing. Irenez has had your baggage taken to a vacant officers' efficiency back toward the landing pad. It's small, I'm afraid, but I trust you'll find it comfortable enough." He stood up. "Perhaps later over dinner we can continue this discussion."

 Han looked at Lando. Such convenient timing, the other's expression said; but he kept the thought to himself. "Sounds fine," Han told Bel Iblis for both of them.

 "Good," Bel Iblis smiled. "I'll need Sena with me, but we'll point you in the direction of your quarters on our way out. Unless you'd rather I assign you a guide."

 "We can find it," Han assured him.

 "All right. Someone will come to get you for dinner. Until later, then."

 

 They walked in silence for probably half the distance to their quarters before Lando finally spoke. "You want to go ahead and get it over with?"

 "Get what over with?" Han growled.

 "Chewing me out for not bowing and scraping in front of your pal the Senator," Lando said. "Do it and get it over with, because we have to talk."

 Han kept his eyes straight ahead. "You weren't just not bowing and scraping, pal," he bit out. "I've seen Chewie in a bad mood be more polite than you were back there."

 "You're right," Lando acknowledged. "You want to be mad a little longer, or are you ready to hear my reasons?"

 "Oh, this should be interesting," Han said sarcastically. "You've got a good reason to be rude to a former Imperial Senator, huh?"

 "He's not telling us the truth, Han," Lando said earnestly. "Not the whole truth, anyway.

 "So?" Han said. "Who says he has to tell strangers everything?"

 "He brought us here," Lando countered. "Why do that and then lie to us about it?"

 Han frowned sideways at his friend and through his annoyance he saw for the first time the tension lines in Lando's face. Whatever Lando was reaching for here, he was serious about it. "Okay," he said, a little more calmly. "What did he lie about?"

 "This camp, for starters, Lando said, gesturing toward the nearest building. "The Senator said they move around a lotfourteen sites in seven years, remember? But this place has been here a lot longer than half a year.

 Han looked at the building as they passed it. At the smoothness of the edges where the memory-plastic would fold up, at the signs of wear in the subfoundation "There are other things, too," Lando went on. "That headquarters lounge back theredid you notice all the decoration they had in that place? Probably a dozen sculptures scattered around on those corner ledges between the booths, plus a lot of light poles. And that doesn't even count all the stuff on the walls. There was a whole antique repeater display panel mounted over the main bar, a ship's chrono next to the exit"

 "I was there, too, remember?" Han cut him off. "What's your point?"

 "My point is that this place isn't ready to pack up and ship off planet on three minutes' notice," Lando said quietly. "Not anymore. And you don't get this soft and comfortable if you're still in the business of launching major attacks against Imperial bases."

 "Maybe they decided to lie low for a while," Han said. This business of having to defend Bel Iblis was starting to feel uncomfortable.

 "Could be," Lando said. "In that case, the question is why? What else could he be holding his ships and troops back for?"

 Han chewed at the inside of his cheek. He saw where Lando was going with this, all right. "You think he's made a deal with Fey'lya."

 "That's the obvious answer, Lando agreed soberly. "You heard how he talked about Mon Mothma, like he expected her to declare herself Emperor any day now. Fey'lya's influence?"

 Han thought it over. It was still crazy, but not nearly as crazy as it had seemed at first blush. Though if Fey'lya thought he could stage a coup with six private Dreadnaughts, he was in for a rude surprise.

 But on the other hand "Wait a minute, Lando, this is crazy, he said. "If they're plotting against Mon Mothma, why bring us here?"

 Lando hissed softly between his teeth. "Well, that brings us to the worst case scenario, Han old buddy. Namely, that your friend the Senator is a complete phony and that what we've got here is a giant Imperial scam."

 Han blinked. "Nowyou've lost me."

 "Think about it," Lando urged, lowering his voice as a group of uniformed men rounded a corner of one of the buildings and headed off in another direction. "Garm Bel Iblis, supposedly killed, suddenly returned from the dead? And not only alive, but with his own personal army on top of it? An army that neither of us has ever heard of?"

 "Yeah, but Bel Iblis wasn't exactly a recluse," Han pointed out. "There were a lot of holos and recordings of him when I was growing up. You'd have to go to a lot of effort to look and sound that much like him."

 "If you had those records handy to compare him with, sure," Lando agreed. "But all you've got is memories. It wouldn't take that much effort to rig a fairly close copy. And we know that this base has been sitting here for more than a year. Maybe abandoned by someone else; and it wouldn't take much effort to throw a fake army together. Not for the Empire."

 Han shook his head. "You're skating on drive trails, Lando. The Empire's not going to go to this much effort just for us."

 "Maybe they didn't," Lando said. "Maybe it was for Fey'lya's benefit, and we just happened to stumble in on it."

 Han frowned. "Fey'lya'sbenefit?"

 "Sure," Lando said. "Start with the Empire gimmicking Ackbar's bank account. That puts Ackbar under suspicion and ripe for someone to push him off his perch. Enter Fey'lya, convinced that he's got the support of the legendary Garm Bel Iblis and a private army behind him. Fey'lya makes his bid for power, the New Republic hierarchy is thrown into a tangle; and while no one's watching, the Empire moves in and takes back a sector or two. Quick, clean, and simple."

 Han snorted under his breath. "That's what you call simple, huh?"

 "We're dealing with a Grand Admiral, Han," Lando reminded him. "Anything is possible."

 "Yeah, well, possible doesn't mean likely," Han countered. "If they're running a con game, why would they bringus here?"

 "Why not? Our presence doesn't hurt the plan any. Might even help it a little. They show us the setup, send us back, we blow the whistle on Fey'lya, and Mon Mothma pulls back ships to protect Coruscant from a coup attempt that never materializes. More chaos, and even more unprotected sectors for the Imperials to gobble up."

 Han shook his head. "I think you're jumping at shadows."

 "Maybe," Lando said darkly. "And maybe you're putting too much trust in the ghost of a Corellian Senator."

 They had reached their quarters now, one of a double row of small square buildings each about five meters on a side. Han keyed in the lock combination Sena had given them, and they went inside.

 The apartment was about as stark and simple as it could be while still remaining even halfway functional. It consisted of a single room with a compact cooking niche on one side and a door leading to what was probably a bathroom on the other. A brown fold down table/console combo and two old-fashioned contour chairs upholstered in military gray occupied much of the space, with the cabinets of what looked like two fold-down beds positioned to take up the table's share of the floor space at night. "Cozy," Lando commented.

 "Probably can be packed up and shipped off planet on three minutes' notice, too," Han said.

 "I agree," Lando nodded. "This is exactly the sort of feel that lounge should have had, only it didn't.

 "Maybe they figured they ought to have at least one building around here that didn't look like it came out of the Clone Wars," Han suggested.

 "Maybe," Lando said, squatting down beside one of the chairs and peering at the edge of the seat cushion. "Probably pulled them out of that Dreadnaught up there." Experimentally he dug his fingers under the gray material. "Looks like they didn't even add any extra padding before they reupholstered them with this"

 He broke off, and abruptly his face went rigid. "What is it?" Han demanded.

 Slowly, Lando turned to look up at him. "This chair," he whispered. "It's not gray underneath. It's blue-gold."

 "Okay," Han said, frowning. "So?"

 "You don't understand. The Fleet doesn't do the interiors of military ships in blue-gold. They've never done them in blue-gold. Not under the Empire, not under the New Republic, not under the Old Republic. Except one time."

 "Which was?" Han prompted.

 Lando took a deep breath. "TheKatana fleet."

 Han stared at him, an icy feeling digging up under his breastbone. TheKatana fleet "That can't be right, Lando," he said. "Got to be a mistake."

 "No mistake, Han," Lando shook his head. Digging his fingers in harder, he lifted the edge of the gray covering high enough to show the material beneath it. "I once spent two whole months researching the Dark Force. This is it."

 Han gazed at the age-dulled blue-gold cloth, a sense of unreality creeping over him. TheKatana fleet. The Dark Force. Lost for half a century and now suddenly found.

 Maybe. "We need something better in the way of proof," he told Lando. "This doesn't do it by itself."

 Lando nodded, still half in shock. "That would explain why they kept us aboard theLady Luck the whole way here," he said. "They'd never be able to hide the fact that their Dreadnaught was running with only two thousand crewers instead of the normal sixteen. TheKatana fleet."

 "We need to get a look inside one of the ships," Han persisted. "That recognition code Irenez sentI don't suppose you made a recording of it?"

 Lando took a deep breath and seemed to snap out of it. "We can probably reconstruct it," he said. "But if they've got any sense, their code for getting in won't be the same as their code for getting out. But I don't think we have to get aboard the ships themselves. All I need is a good, close look at that,t repeater display panel back in the headquarters lounge."

 "Okay," Han nodded grimly. "Let's go and get you that look."

 

 CHAPTER
16

 It took them only a few minutes to make their way back to the headquarters lounge. Han kept an eye on the pedestrian and vehicle traffic as they walked, hoping they were still early enough for the place to be empty. Getting a close look at that repeater display would be tricky enough without a whole bunch of people sitting around with nothing better to do than watch what was happening at the bar. "What exactly are we looking for?" he asked as they came in sight of the building.

 "There should be some specialized input slots on the back for the full-rig slave circuitry readouts," Lando told him. "And there'll be production serial numbers, too."

 Han nodded. So they were going to need to get the thing off the wall. Great. "How come you know so much about the fleet?"

 "Like I said, I did a lot of studying." Lando snorted under his breath. "If you must know, I got stuck with a fake map to it as part of a deal back when I was selling used ships. I figured if I could learn enough about it to look like an expert I might be able to unload the map on someone else and get my money back."

 "Did you?"

 "You really want to know?"

 "I guess not. Get ready; it's show time."

 They were in luck. Aside from the bartender and a couple of deactivated serving droids behind the bar, the place was deserted. "Welcome back, gentlemen," the bartender greeted them. "What can I get you?"

 "Something to take back to our quarters," Han told giving the shelves behind the bar a quick once-over. They had a good selection herethere were probably a hundred bottles of various shapes and sizes. But there was also a door off to the side that probably led back to a small storeroom. That'd be their best bet. "I don't suppose you'd have any Vistulo brandale on hand."

 "I think we do," the bartender said, peering back at his selection. "Yesthere it is."

 "What's the vintage?" Han asked.

 "Ah" The bartender brought the bottle over. "It's a `49."

 Han made a face. "Don't have any `46, do you? Maybe stashed in the back room somewhere?"

 "I don't think so, but I'll check," the bartender said agreeably, heading toward the door.

 "I'll come with you," Han offered, ducking under the bar and joining him. "If you don't have any `46, mayle there'll be something else that'll do as well."

 For a second the bartender looked like he was going to object. But he'd seen the two of them having a friendly drink earlier with Bel Iblis himself, and anyway, Han was already halfway to the storeroom door. "I guess that'd be okay," he said.

 "Great," Han said, opening the door and ushering the bartender through.

 He didn't know how long it would take Lando to get the repeater display off the wall, check it out, and then put it back up. On the theory it was better to play it safe, he managed to drag out the search for a `46 Vistulo for a full five minutes. Eventually, with cheerful good grace, he settled for a `48 Kibsbae instead. The bartender led the way out of the room; mentally crossing his fingers, Han followed.

 Lando was standing at the same place at the bar where he'd been when Han had left him, his bands on the bar, his face tight. And for good reason. Standing a few paces behind him, her hand on the butt of her blaster, was Irenez.

 "Well, hello, Irenez," Han said, trying his best innocent look on her. "Funny meeting you here."

 The innocent look was wasted. "Not all that funny," Irenez said tartly. "Sena assigned me to keep an eye on you. You get what you came for?"

 Han looked at Lando, saw the fractional nod. "I think so, yeah," he said.

 "Glad to hear it. Let's gooutside."

 Han handed the bottle of Kibshae to the bartender. "Keep it," he said. "Looks like the party's been canceled."

 

 There was an old five-passenger landspeeder waiting outside when they emerged from the lounge. "Inside," Irenez said, motioning to the vehicle's aft doorway.

 Han and Lando obeyed. There, sitting with uncharacteristic stiffless in one of the passenger seats, Sena Leikvold Midanyl was waiting. "Gentlemen," she said gravely as they entered. "Sit down, please."

 Han chose one of the seats, swiveled it to face her. "Time for dinner already?"

 "Irenez, take the controls," Sena said, ignoring him. "Drive us around the campI don't care where."

 Silently, Irenez made her way to the front of the vehicle; and with a slight lurch they were off. "You didn't stay in your room very long," Sena said to Han.

 "I don't remember the Senator saying anything about being confined to quarters," Han countered.

 "He didn't," Sena agreed. "On the other hand, a properly brought up guest should know better than to wander unescorted around sensitive areas.

 "I apologize," Han said, trying to keep a sarcastic edge out of his voice. "I didn't realize your liquor supply was classified." He glanced out the window. "If you're trying to take us back to our quarters, you're going the wrong way."

 Sena studied his face a moment. "I came to ask you a favor."

 It was about the last thing Han would have expected her to say, and it took him a second to find his voice again. "What sort of favor?"

 "I want you to talk to Mon Mothma for me. To ask her and the Council to invite Senator Bel Iblis to join the New Republic."

 Han shrugged. Wasthat why they'd brought him and Lando all the way over here? "You don't need a special invitation to join up. All you have to do is contact someone on the Council and offer your services."

 A muscle in Sena's cheek twitched. "I'm afraid that in the Senator's case it's not going to be quite that easy," she said. "It's not so much a matter of joining the New Republic as of rejoining it."

 Han threw a frown at Lando. "Oh?" he said carefully.

 Sena sighed, half turning to gaze out the side window. "It happened a long time ago," she said. "Before the various resistance groups fighting the Empire were formally consolidated into the Rebel Alliance. You know anything about that period of history?"

 "Just what's in the official record," Han said. "Mon Mothma and Bail Organa of Alderaan got three of the biggest groups together and convinced them to make an alliance. After that the whole thing snowballed."

 "Have you ever heard the name of that first agreement?"

 "Sure. It was called the Corellian Treaty" Han broke off. "TheCorellian Treaty?"

 "Yes," Sena nodded. "It was Senator Bel Iblis, not Mon Mothma, who convinced those three resistance groups to agree to a meeting. And, furthermore, who guaranteed protection for them."

 For a long minute the only sound in the speeder was the hum of the repulsorlifts. "What happened?" Lando asked at last.

 "To put it bluntly, Mon Mothma began to take over," Sena said. "Senator Bel Iblis was far better at strategy and tactics than she was, better even than many of the Rebellion's generals and admirals in those early days. But she had the gift of inspiration, the knack of getting diverse groups and species to work together. Gradually, she became the most visible symbol of the Rebellion, with Organa and the Senator increasingly relegated to the background."

 "Must have been hard for someone like Bel Iblis to take," Lando murmured.

 "Yes, it was," Sena said. "But you have to understand that it wasn't just pride that drove him to withdraw his support. Bail Organa had been a strong moderating influence on Mon Mothma he was one of the few people whom she respected and trusted enough to pay serious attention to. After he was killed in the Death Star's attack on Alderaan, there was really no one of equal status who could stand up to her. She began to take more and more power to herself, and the Senator began to suspect that she was going to overthrow the Emperor only to set herself up in his place."

 "So he pulled you out of the Alliance and started his own private War against the Empire," Lando said. "Did you know any of this, Han?"

 "Never heard a whisper," Han shook his head.

 "I'm not surprised," Sena said. "Wouldyou have advertised a defection by someone of the Senator's stature? Especially in the middle of a war?"

 "Probably not," Han conceded. "I suppose the only surprise is that more groups didn't back out like you did. Mon Mothma can be pretty overbearing when she wants to be."

 "There wasn't any doubt as to who was in charge during the war, either," Lando added dryly. "I once saw her make Admiral Ackbar and General Madine both back down on one of their pet projects when she decided she didn't like it."

 Han looked at Sena, a sudden thought striking him.

 "Is that why you've cut back your raids against the Empire? So that you'd be ready to move against Mon Mothma if she turned the New Republic into a dictatorship?"

 "That's it exactly," Sena said. "We moved here to Peregrine's Nest just under three years ago, suspended all operations except materiel raids, and started working up tactical contingency plans. And settled in to wait for the Senator's triumphal vindication." Her cheek twitched again. "And we've been waiting ever since."

 Han looked out the window at the camp passing by outside, a hollow sense of loss filling him. The legendary Senator Bel Iblis waiting for a return to power that would never come. "It's not going to happen," he told Sena quietly.

 "I know that." She hesitated. "Down deep, so does the Senator."

 "Except that he can't swallow his pride long enough to go to Mon Mothma and ask to be let back in." Han nodded. "So he gets you to ask us"

 "The Senator had nothing to do with this," Sena cut him off sharply. "He doesn't even know I'm talking to you. This is on my responsibility alone."

 Han drew back a little. "Sure," he said. "Okay."

 Sena shook her head. "I'm sorry," she apologized. "I didn't mean to snap at you.

 "It's okay," Han said, feeling some sympathetic ache of his own. She could have all the good intentions and logic in the galaxy on her side, but this probably still looked and felt to her like betrayal. A stray memory clicked: the expression on Luke's face, just before the battle off Yavin with the first Death Star. When he'd thought Han was going to run off and abandon them

 "Han," Lando said quietly.

 Han looked over at his friend, shaking off the memory. Lando raised his eyebrows slightly in reminder "We'll make you a deal, Sena," Han said, turning back to her. "We'll talk to Mon Mothma about the Senator. You talk to us about theKatana fleet."

 Sena's face went rigid. "TheKatana fleet?"

 "Where your six Dreadnaughts came from," Lando said. "Don't bother denying itI got a good look at that repeater display,you've got up over the bar in the headquarters lounge.

 Sena took a deep breath. "No. I can't tell you anything about that."

 "Why not?" Lando asked. "We're all about to be allies again, remember?"

 An unpleasant tingle ran up Han's back. "Unless you've already promised the fleet to Fey'lya."

 "We've promised Fey'lya nothing," Sena said flatly. "Not that he hasn't asked for it."

 Han grimaced. "So heis trying for a coup."

 "Not at all," Sena shook her head. "Fey'lya wouldn't know what to do with a military coup if you gift wrapped it and handed it to him on a drinks tray. You have to understand that Bothans think in terms of political and persuasive influence, not military power. The typical Bothan's goal is to go through life getting more and more people to listen to what he has to say. Fey'lya thinks that being the one to bring the Senator back into the New Republic will be a large step in that direction."

 "Especially if Ackbar isn't around to oppose him?" Han asked.

 Sena nodded. "Yes, that's unfortunately another typical Bothan move. A Bothan leader who stumbles is invariably jumped on by all those who want to take over his position. In the distant past the attacks were literalfought with knives and usually death. Now, it's been modified to more of a verbal assassination. Progress, I suppose."

 "Ackbar's not a Bothan," Lando pointed out.

 "The technique is easily adapted to other races.

 Han grunted. "What a great group to have as allies. So do they just stab, or do they also help with the tripping?"

 "You mean the bank transfer?" Sena shook her head. "No, I doubt that was Fey'lya's doing. As a rule Bothus don't stick their necks out far enough to concoct plots on their own. They much prefer to take advantage of other people's."

 "More like scavengers than hunters," Han said sourly. Probably explained why he'd always disliked Fey'lya and his crowd. "So what do we do about him?"

 Sena shrugged. "All you really need to do is get Ackbar cleared. As soon as he's not vulnerable to attack anymore, Fey'lya should back off."

 "Great," Han growled. "Problem is, with a Grand Admiral in charge of the Empire, we might not have that much time.

 "And if we don't, neither do you," Lando added. "Wounded dignity aside, Sena, the Senator had better start facing reality. You're a small, isolated group with a line on theKatana fleet, and there's an Empire out there hungry for new warships. The minute the Grand Admiral tumbles to what you've got, he'll have the whole Imperial Fleet on you before you can blink twice. Bring theKatana fleet over to the New Republic and you get to be heroes. Wait too long, and you'll lose everything."

 "I know that," Sena said, her voice almost too low to hear. Han waited, mentally crossing his fingers"We don't actually know where the fleet is," she said. "Our Dreadnaughts came from a man who says he stumbled on them about fifteen years ago. He's thin, below-average height, with a sort of weasely look about him. He has short white hair and a heavily lined face, though I suspect much of that appearance is due more to some past disease or injury than actual age."

 "What's his name?" Han asked.

 "I don't know. He's never told us that." She hesitated again, then plunged ahead. "He loves to gamble, though. All our meetings with him have been aboard theCoral Vanda , usually across gaming tables. The staff there seemed to know him quite well, though the way he was throwing money around, that may not mean anything. Croupiers always get to know the losers quickly."

 "TheCoral Vanda ?" Han asked.

 "It's a subocean luxury casino on Pantolomin," Lando told him. "Does three- and seven-day runs through the big network of reefs lying off the northern continent. I've always wanted to go there, but never had the chance."

 "Well, you've got it now," Han said. He looked at Sena. "I suppose the next question is how we're going to get out of here."

 "That won't be a problem," she said, her voice sounding strained. Already having second thoughts, probably. "I can get theHarrier to take you back to New Cov. When do you want to leave?"

 "Right now," Han said. He saw Sena's expression "Look, no matter when we go, you're going to have some explaining to do to the Senator. We're in a race with the Empire here even a few hours might make a difference."

 "I suppose you're right," she said with a reluctant nod. "Irenez, take us to their ship. I'll make the arrangements from there."

 

 It turned out there was no need to make arrangements from theLady Luck . Standing outside the ship's ramp as they arrived, clearly waiting for them, was Senator Bel Iblis.

 "Hello, Solo; Calrissian," he smiled as Han and Lando stepped out of the speeder. "You weren't at your quarters, and I thought you might be here. I see I guessed right."

 His eyes flicked over Han's shoulder as Sena emerged from the speeder. Looked again into Han's face and abruptly the easy smile vanished. "Sena? What's going on?"

 "They know about theKatana fleet, Commander," she said quietly, coming up beside Han. "And I told them about our contact.

 "I see," Bel Iblis said evenly. "And so you're leaving. To see if you can persuade him to turn the Dark Force over to the New Republic."

 "That's right, sir," Han said, matching his tone. "We need the shipsneed them pretty badly. But not as much as we need good fighters. And good commanders."

 For a long moment Bel Iblis gazed at him. "I won't go to Mon Mothma like a beggar pleading to be let in," he said at last.

 "You left for good reasons," Han persisted. "You can come back the same way.

 Again, Bel Iblis's eyes flicked to Sena. "No," he said. "Too many people know what happened between us. I would look like an old fool. Or like a beggar."

 He looked past Han, his eyes sweeping slowly across the buildings of Peregrine's Nest. "I don't have anything to bring, Solo," he said, his voice tinged with something that sounded like regret. "Once I'd dreamed of having a fleet that would rival the best in the New Republic. A fleet, and a string of decisive and pivotal victories over the Empire. With that, perhaps I could have returned with dignity and respect." He shook his head. "But what we have here barely qualifies as a strike force."

 "Maybe so, but six Dreadnaughts aren't anything to sneer at," Lando put in. "And neither is your combat record. Forget Mon Mothma for a minuteevery military person in the New Republic would be delighted to have you in."

 Bel Iblis cocked an eyebrow. "Perhaps. I suppose it's worth thinking about."

 "Especially with a Grand Admiral in charge of the Empire," Han pointed out. "If he catches you here alone, you'll have had it."

 Bel Iblis smiled tightly. "That thought has occurred to me, Solo. Several times a day." He straightened up.

 "TheHarrier is leaving in half an hour to take Breil'lya back to New Cov. I'll instruct them to take you and theLady Luck along."

 Han and Lando exchanged glances. "You think it'll be safe to go back to New Cov, sir?" Han asked. "There might still be Imperials hanging around."

 "There won't be." Bel Iblis was positive. "I've studied the Imperials and their tactics a long time. Aside from not expecting us to show up again so soon, they really can't afford to hang around any one place for long. Besides, we have to go thereBreil'lya will need to pick up his ship."

 Han nodded, wondering what kind of report Breil'lya would be giving to his boss when he got back to Coruscant. "All right. Well I guess we'd better get the ship prepped."

 "Yes." Bel Iblis hesitated, then held out his hand. "It was good to see you, Solo. I hope we'll meet again."

 "I'm sure we will, sir," Han assured him, grasping the outstretched hand.

 The Senator nodded to Lando. "Calrissian," he said. Releasing Han's hand, he turned and walked away across the landing field.

 Han watched him go, trying to figure out whether he admired the Senator more than he pitied him or vice versa. It was a useless exercise. "Our luggage is still back at our quarters," he told Sena.

 "I'll have it sent over while you get the ship prepped." She looked at Han, her eyes suddenly blazing with a smoldering fire. "But I want you to remember one thing," she said with deadly earnestness. "You can go now, with our blessings. But if you betray the Senatorin any wayyou will die. At my hand, personally, if necessary."

 Han held her gaze, considering what to say. To remind her, perhaps, that he'd been attacked by bounty hunters and interstellar criminals, shot at by Imperial stormtroopers, and tortured at the direction of Darth Vader himself. To suggest that after all that, a threat coming from someone like Sena was too laughable to even take seriously. "I understand," he said gravely. "I won't let you down."

 

 From the dorsal hatchway connection behind them came the creak of a stressed seal; and through theLady Luck 's canopy the patch of stars visible around the bulk of the Dreadnaught abruptly flashed into starlines. "Here we go again," Lando said, his voice sounding resigned. "How do I keep letting you talk me into these things?"

 "Because you're the respectable one," Han told him, running an eye over theLady Luck 's instruments. There wasn't a lot there to see, with the engines and most of the systems running at standby. "And because you know as well as I do that we have to do it. Sooner or later the Empire's going to find out that theKatana fleet's been found and start looking for it themselves. And if they get to it before we do, we're going to be in big trouble." And here they were, stuck uselessly for another two days in hyperspace while theHarrier took them back to New Cov. Not because they wanted to go there, but because Bel Iblis wasn't willing to trust them with the location of his stupid Peregrine's Nest base

 "You're worried about Leia, aren't you?" Lando asked into the silence.

 "I shouldn't have let her go," Han muttered. "Something's gone wrong. I just know it. That lying little alien's turned her over to the Empire, or the Grand Admiral's out-thought us again. I don't know, butsomething ."

 "Leia can take care of herself, Han," Lando said quietly. "And even Grand Admirals sometimes make mistakes."

 Han shook his head. "He made his mistake at Sluis Van, Lando. He won't make another one. Bet you theFalcon he won't."

 Lando clapped him on the shoulder. "Come on, buddy, brooding about it won't help. We've got two days to kill. Let's go break out a sabacc deck."

 

 The Grand Admiral read the dispatch twice before turning his glowing eyes on Pellaeon. "You vouch for the reliability of this report, Captain?"

 "As much as I can vouch for any report that doesn't originate with an Imperial agent," Pellaeon told him. "On the other hand, this particular smuggler has fed us fifty two reports over the last ten years, forty eight of which proved to be accurate. I'd say he's worth believing."

 Thrawn looked back at the reader. "Endor," he murmured, half to himself. "Why Endor?"

 "I don't know, sir," Pellaeon said. "Perhaps they were looking for another place to hide."

 "Among the Ewoks?" Thrawn snorted derisively. "That would be desperation indeed. But no matter. If theMillennium Falcon is there, then so is Leia Organa Solo. Alert Navigation and Engineering; we leave immediately fur Endor"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded, keying in the orders. "Shall I have Khabarakh brought up from Nystao?"

 "Yes. Khabarakh." Thrawn said the name thoughtfully. "Note the interesting timing here, Captain. Khabarakh comes back to Honoghr after a month's absence, just as Solo and Organa Solo head off on secret errands to New Cov and Endor. Coincidence?"

 Pellaeon frowned. "I don't follow you, sir."

 Thrawn smiled thinly. "What I think, Captain, is that we re seeing a new degree of subtlety among our enemies. They knew that the return of a survivor from the failed Kashyyyk operation would catch my attention. They therefore arranged his release to coincide with their own missions, in the hope I would be too preoccupied to notice them. Doubtless when we break Khabarakh, we'll learn a great many things from him that will cost us countless man-hours to finally prove wrong." Thrawn snorted again. "No, leave him where he is. You may inform the dynasts that I have decided to permit them the full seven days of public shame, after which they may perform the rites of discovery as they choose. No matter how useless his information, Khabarakh may still serve the Empire by dying painfully. As an object lesson to his race."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon hesitated. "May I point out, though, that such a drastic psychological fragmentation and reconditioning is well outside the Rebellion's usual operating procedure."

 "I agree," Thrawn said grimly. "Which implies all the more strongly that whatever Organa Solo is looking for on Endor, it's considerably mote vital to the Rebellion's war effort than mere sanctuary."

 Pellaeon frowned, trying to think of what might be on Endor that anyone could possibly want. "Some of the materiel left over from the Death Star project?" he hazarded.

 "More valuable than that," the Grand Admiral shook his head. "Information, perhaps, that the Emperor might have had with him when he died. Information they may think they can still retrieve."

 And then Pellaeon got it. "The location of the Mount Tantiss storehouse."

 Thrawn nodded. "That's the only thing I can think of that would be worth this much effort on their part. At any rate, it's a risk we can't afford to take. Not now."

 "Agreed." Pellaeon's board pinged: Navigation and Engineering signaling ready. "Shall I break orbit?"

 "At your convenience, Captain."

 Pellaeon nodded to the helm. "Take us out. Course as set by Navigation."

 Through the viewports the planet below began to fall away; and as it did so there was the short trill of a priority message coming through. Pellaon pulled it up, read the heading. "Admiral? Report from theAdamant , in the Abregado system. They've captured one of Talon Karrde's freighters. Transcript of the preliminary interrogation is coming through now." He frowned as he glanced down to the end. "It's rather short, sir."

 "Thank you," Thrawn said with quiet satisfaction as he pulled up the report to his own station.

 He was still reading it when theChimaera made the jump to lightspeed. Reading it very, very carefully.

 

 CHAPTER
17

 Mara had never been to the Abregado-rae Spaceport before; but as she walked along its streets she decided it deserved every bit of the rock-bottom reputation it had worked so hard to achieve.

 Not that it showed on the surface. On the contrary, the place was neat and almost painfully clean, though with that grating antiseptic quality that showed the cleanliness had been imposed from above by government decree instead of from below by the genuine wishes of the inhabitants. It seemed reasonably peaceful, too, as spaceports went, with lots of uniformed security men patrolling the streets around the landing pits.

 But beneath the surface glitter the rot showed straight through. Showed in the slightly furtive manner of the locals; in the halfhearted swaggering of the uniformed security men; in the lingering stares of the plainclothes but just as obvious quiet security men. The whole spaceportmaybe the whole planetwas being held together with tie wire and blaster power packs.

 A petty totalitarian regime, and a populace desperate to escape it. Just the sort of place where anyone would betray anyone else for the price of a ticket off planet. Which meant that if any of the locals had tumbled to the fact that there was a smuggling ship sitting here under Security's nose, Mara had about ten steps to go before the whole place came down on top of her.

 Walking toward a faded door with the equally faded sign "Landing Pit 21" over it, she hoped sardonically that it wasn't a trap. She would really hate to die in a place like this.

 The door to the landing pit was unlocked. Taking a deep breath, acutely conscious of the two pairs of uniformed security men within sight of her, she went inside.

 It was theEtherway , all right, looking just as shabby and decrepit as it had when Fynn Torve had had to abandon it in Landing Pit 63 of this same spaceport. Mara gave it a quick once-over, checked out all the nooks and crannies in the pit where an armed ambush squad could be skulking, and finally focused on the dark-haired young man lounging in a chair by the freighter's lowered ramp. Even in that casual slouch he couldn't shake the military air that hovered around him. "Hello, there," he called to her, lowering the data pad he'd been reading. "Nice day for flying. You interested in hiring a ship?"

 "No," she said, walking toward him as she tried to watch all directions at once. "I'm more in a buying mood, myself. What kind of ship is this flying hatbox, anyway?"

 "It's a Harkners-Balix Nine-Oh-Three," the other sniffed with a second-rate attempt at wounded pride. "Flying hatbox, indeed."

 Not much of an actor, but he was clearly getting a kick out of all this cloak-and-blade stuff. Setting her teeth firmly together, Mara sent a silent curse down on Torve's head for setting up such a ridiculous identification procedure in the first place. "Looks like a Nine-Seventeen to me," she said dutifully. "Or even a Nine-Twenty-Two."

 "No, it's a Nine-Oh-Three," he insisted. "Trust m my uncle used to make landing gear pads for them. Come inside and I'll show you how to tell the difference."

 "Oh, that'll be great," Mara muttered under her breath as she followed him up the ramp.

 "Glad you finally got here," the man commented over his shoulder as they reached the top of the ramp. "I was starting to think you'd been caught.

 "That could still happen if you don't shut up," Mara growled back. "Keep your voice down, will you?"

 "It's okay," he assured her. "I've got all your MSE droids clattering around on cleaning duty just inside the outer hull. That should block out any audio probes."

 Theoretically, she supposed, he was right. As a practical matter  well, if the locals had the place under surveillance they were in trouble, anyway. "You have any trouble getting the ship out of impoundment?" she asked him.

 "Not really," he said. "The spaceport administrator said the whole thing was highly irregular, but he didn't give me any major grief about it." He grinned. "Though I suppose the size of the bribe I slipped him might have had something to do with that. My name's Wedge Antilles, by the way. I'm a friend of Captain Solo's."

 "Nice to meet you," Mara said. "Solo couldn't make it himself?"

 Antilles shook his head. "He had to leave Coruscant on some kind of special mission, so he asked me to get the ship sprung for you. I was scheduled for escort duty a couple systems over anyway, so it wasn't a problem."

 Mara ran a quick eye over him. From his build and general manner"B-wing pilot?" she hazarded.

 "X-wing," he corrected her. "I've got to get back before my convoy finishes loading. Want me to give you an escort out of here?"

 "Thanks, but no," she said, resisting the urge to say something sarcastic. The first rule of smuggling was to stay as inconspicuous as possible, and flying out of a third-rate spaceport with a shiny New Republic X-wing starfighter in tow didn't exactly qualify as a low-profile stance. "Tell Solo thanks."

 "Right. Oh, one other thing," Antilles added as she started past him. "Han also wanted me to ask you if your people might be interested in selling information on our friend with the eyes."

 Mara sent him a sharp look. "Our friend with the eyes?"

 Antilles shrugged. "That's what he said. He said you'd understand."

 Mara felt her lip twist. "I understand just fine. Tell him I'll pass on the message."

 "Okay." He hesitated. "It sounded like it was pretty important"

 "I said I'll pass on the message."

 He shrugged again. "Okayjust doing my job. Have a good trip." With a friendly nod, he headed back down the ramp. Still half expecting a trap, Mara got the hatchway sealed for flight and went up to the bridge.

 It took a quarter hour to run the ship through its preflight sequence, almost exactly the amount of time it took the spaceport controllers to confirm her for takeoff. Easing in the repulsorlifts, she lifted clear of the landing pit and made for space.

 She was nearly high enough to kick in the sublight drive when the back of her neck began to tingle.

 "Uh-oh," she muttered aloud, giving the displays a quick scan. Nothing was visible; but this close to a planetary mass, that meant less than nothing. Anything could be lurking just over the horizon, from a single flight of TIE fighters all the way up to an Imperial Star Destroyer.

 But maybe they weren't quite ready yet

 She threw full power to the drive, feeling herself pressed back into the seat cushion for a few seconds as the acceleration compensators fought to catch up. An indignant howl came from the controller on the comm speaker; ignoring him, she keyed the computer, hoping that Torve had followed Karrde's standard procedure when he'd first put down on Abregado.

 He had. The calculation for the jump out of here had already been computed and loaded, just waiting to be initiated. She got the computer started making the minor adjustments that would correct for a couple of months of general galactic drift, and looked back out the forward viewport.

 There, emerging over the horizon directly ahead, was the massive bulk of aVictory -class Star Destroyer.

 Bearing toward her.

 For a long heartbeat Mara just sat there, her mind skimming through the possibilities, all the time knowing full well how futile the exercise was. The Star Destroyer's commander had planned his interception with exquisite skill: given their respective vectors and theEtherway 's proximity to the planet, there was absolutely no way she would be able to elude the larger ship's weapons and tractor beams long enough to make her escape to lightspeed. Briefly, she toyed with the hope that the Imperials might not be after her at all, that they were actually gunning for that Antilles character still on the surface. But that hope, too, evaporated quickly. A single X-wing pilot could hardly be important enough to tie up aVictory -class Star Destroyer for. And if he was, they would certainly not have been so incompetent as to spring the trap prematurely.

 "FreighterEtherway ," a cold voice boomed over her comm speaker. "This is the Star DestroyerAdamant . You are ordered to shut down your engines and prepare to be brought aboard."

 So that was that. They had indeed been looking for her. In a very few minutes now she would be their prisoner.

 Unless

 Reaching over, she keyed her mike. "Star DestroyerAdamant , this is theEtherway ," she said briskly. "I congratulate you on your vigilance; I was afraid I was going to have to search the next five systems to find an Imperial ship."

 "You will shut down all deflector systems" The voice faltered halfway through the standard speech as the fact belatedly penetrated that this was not the normal response of the normal Imperial prisoner.

 "I'll want to speak to your captain the minute I'm aboard," Mara said into the conversational gap. "I'll need him to set up a meeting with Grand Admiral Thrawn and provide me transport to wherever he and theChimaera are at the moment. And get a tractor beam readyI don't want to have to land this monster in your hangar bay myself."

 The surprises were coming too fast for the poor man. "AhfreighterEtherway " he tried again.

 "On second thought, put the captain on now," Mara cut him off. She had the initiative now, and was determined to keep it as long as possible. "There's no one around who can tap into this communication."

 There was a moment of silence. Mara continued on her intercept course, a trickle of doubt beginning to worm its way through her resolve.It's the only way, she told herself sternly.

 "This is the captain," a new voice came on the speaker. "Who are you?"

 "Someone with important information for Grand Admiral Thrawn," Mara told him, shifting from brisk to just slightly haughty. "For the moment, that's all you need to know."

 But the captain wasn't as easily bullied as his junior officers. "Really," he said dryly. "According to our sources, you're a member of Talon Karrde's smuggling gang."

 "And you don't believe such a person could tell the Grand Admiral anything useful?" she countered, letting her tone frost over a bit.

 "Oh, I'm sure you can," the captain said. "I simply don't see any reason why I should bother him with what will be, after all, a routine interrogation."

 Mara squeezed her left hand into a fist. At all costs she had to avoid the kind of complete mind-sifting the captain was obviously hinting at. "I wouldn't advise that," she told him, throwing every bit of the half-remembered dignity and power of the old Imperial court into her voice. "The Grand Admiral would be extremely displeased with you.Extremely displeased."

 There was a short pause. Clearly, the captain was starting to recognize that he had more here than he'd bargained for. Just as clearly, he wasn't ready yet to back down. "I have my orders," he said flatly. "I'll need more than vague hints before I can make you an exception to them."

 Mara braced herself. This was it. After all these years of hiding from the Empire, as well as from everyone else, this was finally it. "Then send a message to the Grand Admiral," she said. "Tell him the recognition code is Hapspir, Barrini, Corbolan, Triaxis."

 There was a moment of silence, and Mara realized she'd finally gotten through to the other. "And your name?" the captain asked, his voice suddenly respectful.

 Beneath her, theEtherway jolted slightly as the Adanant's tractor beam locked on. She was committed now. The only way out was to see it all through. "Tell him," she said, "that he knew me as the Emperor's Hand."

 

 They brought her and theEtherway aboard, settled her with uncertain deference into one of the senior officers' quarters and then headed away from Abregado like a mynock with its tail on fire.

 She was left alone in the cabin for the rest of the day and into the night, seeing no one, speaking with no one. Meals were delivered by an SE4 servant droid; at all other times the door was kept locked. Whether the enforced privacy was on the captain's orders or whether it came from above was impossible to tell, but at least it gave her time to do such limited planning as she could.

 There was similarly no way of knowing where they were going, but from the labored sound of the engines, she could guess they were pushing uncomfortably far past aVictory Star Destroyer's normal flank speed of Point Four Five. Possibly even as high as Point Five, which would mean they were covering a hundred twenty-seven light-years per hour. For a while she kept her mind occupied by trying to guess which system they might be making for; but as the hours ticked by and the number of possibilities grew too unwieldy to keep track of, she abandoned the game.

 Twenty-two hours after leaving Abregado, they arrived at the rendezvous. At the last place Mara would have expected. At the very last place in the galaxy she would have wanted to go. The place where her universe had died a sudden and violent death.

 Endor.

 

 "The Grand Admiral will see you now," the stormtrooper squad leader said, stepping back from the opening door and motioning her ahead. Mara threw a glance at the silent Noghri bodyguard standing on the other side of the doorway and stepped through.

 "Ah," a well-remembered voice called quietly from the command center in the middle of the room. Grand Admiral Thrawn sat in the double display ring, his red eyes glowing at her above the glistening white uniform. "Come in.

 Mara stayed where she was. "Why did you bring me to Endor?" she demanded.

 The glowing eyes narrowed. "I beg your pardon?"

 "You heard me," she said. "Endor. Where the Emperor died. Why did you choose this place for the rendezvous?"

 The other seemed to consider that. "Come closer, Mara Jade."

 The voice was rich with the overtones of command, and Mara found herself walking toward him before she realized what she was doing. "If it's supposed to be a joke, it's in poor taste," she bit out. "If it's supposed to be a test, then get it over with."

 "It is neither," Thrawn said as she came to the edge of the outer display ring and stopped. "The choice was forced upon us by other, unconnected business." One blue-black eyebrow raised slightly. "Or perhaps notentirely unconnected. That still remains to be seen. Tell me, can you really sense the Emperor's presence here?"

 Mara took a deep breath, feeling the air shuddering through her lungs with an ache as real as it was intangible. Could Thrawn see how much this place hurt her? she wondered. How thick with memories and sensations the whole Endor system still remained? Or would he even care about any of that if he did?

 He saw, all right. She could tell that much from the way he was looking at her. What he thought of it she didn't much care. "I can feel the evidence of his death," she told him. "It's not pleasant. Let's get this over with so I can get out of here."

 His lip quirked, perhaps at her assumption that she would in fact be leaving theChimaera . "Very well. Let's begin with some proof of who you were."

 "I gave theAdamant 's captain a high-level recognition code," she reminded him.

 "Which is why you're here instead of in a detention cell," Thrawn said. "The code isn't proof in itself."

 "All right, then," Mara said. "We met once, during the public dedication of the new Assemblage wing of the Imperial Palace on Coruscant. At that ceremony the Emperor introduced me to you as Lianna, one of his favorite dancers. Later, during the more private ceremony that followed, he revealed to you my true identity."

 "And what was that private ceremony?"

 "Your secret promotion to the rank of Grand Admiral."

 Thrawn pursed his lips, his eyes never leaving her face. "You wore a white dress to both ceremonies," he said. "Aside from the sash, the dress had only one decoration. Do you recall what that decoration was?"

 Mara had to think back. "It was a small shouldersculp," she said slowly. "Left shoulder. A Xyquine design, as I remember."

 "It was indeed." Thrawn reached to his control board, touched a switch; and abruptly, the room was filled with holos of shouldersculps on ornate pillars. "The one you wore is somewhere in this room. Find it."

 Mara swallowed, turning slowly as she looked around. She'd had literally hundreds of fancy dresses for her cover role as a member of the Emperor's entourage. To remember one particular shouldersculp out of all that

 She shook her head, trying to clear away the unpleasant buzzing sensation that hovered deep in her mind. She'd had an excellent memory once, one which the Emperor's training had made even better. Focusing her thoughts, fighting upstream against the disquieting aura of this place, she concentrated "That's it," she said, pointing to a delicate filigree of gold and blue.

 Thrawn's expression didn't change, but he seemed to relax a little in his seat. "Welcome back, Emperor's Hand." He touched the switch a second time, and the art gallery vanished. "You've been a long time in returning."

 The glowing eyes bored into her face, the question unspoken but obvious. "What was here for me before?" she countered. "Who but a Grand Admiral would have accepted me as legitimate?"

 "Was that the only reason?"

 Mara hesitated, recognizing the trip wire. Thrawn had been in command of the Empire for over a year now, and yet she hadn't approached him until now. "There were other reasons," she said. "None of which I wish to discuss at this time."

 His face hardened. "As, I presume, you don't wish to discuss why you helped Skywalker escape from Talon Karrde?"

 YOU WILL KILL LUKE SKYWALKER.

 Mara jerked, unsure for that first frozen heartbeat whether the voice had been real or just in her mind. The strange buzzing intensified, and for a moment she could almost see the Emperor's wizened face glaring at her. The image grew clearer, the rest of the room beginning to swim before her eyes

 She took a deep breath, forcing calmness. She would not fall apart. Not here; not in front of the Grand Admiral. "It wasn't my idea to let Skywalker escape," she said.

 "And you were unable to alter that decision?" Thrawn asked, the eyebrow lifting again. "You, the Emperor's Hand?"

 "We were on Myrkr," Mara reminded him stiffly. "Under the influence of a planet full of ysalamiri." She glanced over his shoulder at the ysalamir hanging from the nutrient frame behind his chair. "I doubt you've forgotten their effect on the Force."

 "Oh, I remember it quite well," Thrawn nodded. "It's their dampening of the Force, in fact, that proves Skywalker had help in his escape. All I need to know from you is whether it was Karrde himself who gave the order, or others of his group acting independently."

 So that he would know where to focus his revenge. Mara looked into those glowing eyes, beginning to remember now why the Emperor had made this man a Grand Admiral. "It doesn't matter who's responsible," she said. "I'm here to offer a deal that'll clear the debt."

 "I'm listening," Thrawn said, his face neutral.

 "I want you to stop your harassment of Karrde and his organization. To cancel the cash bounty on all of us, and clear us with all Imperial forces and worlds that you control." She hesitated; but this was no time to go all bashful. "I also want a monetary credit of three million to be deposited under Karrde's name toward the purchase of Imperial goods and services."

 "Indeed," Thrawn said, his lip twitching in an amused smile. "I'm afraid Skywalker isn't worth nearly that much to me. Or do you propose to deliver Coruscant, as well?"

 "I'm not offering Skywalker or Coruscant," Mara said. "I'm offering theKatana fleet."

 The amused smile vanished. "TheKatana fleet?"

 Thrawn repeated quietly, his eyes glittering.

 "Yes, theKatana fleet," Mara said. "The Dark Force, if you prefer the more dramatic title. I presume you've heard of it?"

 "I have indeed. Where is it?"

 The tone of command again; but this time Mara was ready for it. Not that it would have done him any good anyway. "I don't know," she told him. "But Karrde does."

 For a long moment Thrawn gazed at her in silence. "How?" he asked at last.

 "He was on a smuggling mission that went sour," she told him. "They escaped past some Imperial watchdogs, but didn't have time to do a proper jump calculation. They ran into the fleet, thought it was a trap, and jumped again, nearly destroying the ship in the process. Karrde was on nav duty; later, he figured out what they'd hit."

 "Interesting," he murmured. "When exactly was this?"

 "That's all I'll give you until we have a deal," Mara told him. She caught the expression on his face "And if you're thinking of running me through one of Intelligence's sifters, don't bother. I reallydon't know where the fleet is."

 Thrawn studied her. "And you would have blocks set up around it even if you did," he agreed. "All right. Tell me where Karrde is, then."

 "So Intelligence can sift him instead?" Mara shook her head. "No. Let me go back to him, and I'll get you the location. Then we'll trade. Assuming the deal is to your liking."

 A dark shadow had settled across Thrawn's face. "Do not presume to dictate to me, Mara Jade," he said quietly. "Not even in private."

 A small shiver ran up Mara's back. Yes; she was remembering indeed why Thrawn had been made a Grand Admiral. "I was the Emperor's Hand," she reminded him, matching the steel in his tone as best she could. Even to her own ears it came out a poor second. "I spoke for him and even Grand Admirals were obliged to listen."

 Thrawn smiled sardonically. "Really. Your memory serves you poorly, Emperor's Hand. When all is said and done, you were little more than a highly specialized courier."

 Mara glared at him. "Perhaps it isyour memory that needs refreshing, Grand Admiral Thrawn," she retorted. "I traveled throughout the Empire in his name, making policy decisions that changed lives at the highest levels of government"

 "You carried out his will," Thrawn cut her off sharply. "No more. Whether you heard his commands more clearly than the rest of his Hands is irrelevant. It was still his decisions that you implemented."

 "What do you mean, the rest of his Hands?" Mara sniffed. "I was the only"

 She broke off. The look on Thrawn's face and abruptly, all her rising anger drained away. "No," she breathed. "No. You're wrong."

 He shrugged. "Believe what you wish. But don't attempt to blind others with exaggerated memories of your own importance." Reaching to his control board, he tapped a key. "Captain? What report from the boarding party?"

 The reply wasn't audible; but Mara wasn't interested in what Thrawn's men were doing, anyway. He was wrong. Hehad to be wrong. Hadn't the Emperor himself given her the title of Emperor's Hand? Hadn't he himself brought her to Coruscant from her home and trained her, teaching her how to use her rare sensitivity to the Force to serve him?

 He wouldn't have lied to her. He wouldn't have.

 "No, there's no point to that," Thrawn said. He looked up at Mara. "You don't happen to have any idea why Leia Organa Solo might have come to Endor, do you?"

 With an effort, Mara brought her thoughts back from the past. "Organa Solo is here?"

 "TheMillennium Falcon is, at any rate," he said grimly. "Left in orbit, which unfortunately leaves us no way of knowing where she might be. If she's there at all." He turned back to his board. "Very well, Captain. Have the ship brought aboard. Perhaps a closer examination will tell us something."

 He got an acknowledgment and keyed off the circuit. "Very well, Emperor's Hand," he said, looking up at Mara again. "We have an agreement. The Dark Force for the lifting of our death mark against Karrde. How long will it take you to return to Karrde's current base?"

 Mara hesitated; but that information wouldn't do the Grand Admiral much good. "On theEtherway , about three days. Two and a half if I push it."

 "I suggest you do so," Thrawn said. "Since you have exactly eight days to obtain the location and bring it back here to me."

 Mara stared at him. "Eight days? But that"

 "Eight days. Or I find him and get the location my way.

 A dozen possible retorts rushed through Mar'a's mind. Another look at those glowing red eyes silenced all of them. "I'll do what I can," she managed. Turning, she headed back across the room.

 "I'm sure you will," he said after her. "And afterward, we'll sit down and have a long talk together. About your years away from Imperial service and why you've been so long in returning."

 

 Pellaeon stared rigidly at his commander, heart thudding audibly in his chest. "TheKatana fleet?" he repeated carefully.

 "So our young Emperor's Hand told me," Thrawn said. His gaze was fixed solidly on one of the displays in front of him. "She may be lying, of course."

 Pellaeon nodded mechanically, the possibilities sweeping out like a spread cloak before him. "The Dark Force," he murmured the old nickname, listening to the words echo through his mind. "You know, I once had hopes of finding the fleet myself."

 "Most everyone your age did," Thrawn returned dryly. "Is the homing device properly installed aboard her ship?"

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon let his gaze drift around the room, his eyes focusing without real interest on the sculptures and flats that Thrawn had on display today. The Dark Force. Lost for nearly fifty-five years. Now within their grasp

 He frowned suddenly at the sculptures. Many of them looked familiar, somehow.

 "They're the various pieces of art that graced the offices of Rendili StarDrive and the Fleet planning department at the time they were working on the basic design of theKatana ," Thrawn answered his unspoken question.

 "I see," Pellaeon said. He took a deep breath and, reluctantly, brought himself back to reality. "You realize, sir, how improbable this claim of Jade's really is."

 "Certainly it's improbable." Thrawn raised glowing eyes to Pellaeon. "But it's also true." He tapped, a switch, and part of the art gallery vanished. "Observe.

 Pellaeon turned to look. It was the same scene Thrawn had showed him a few days earlier: the three renegade Dreadnaughts providing cover fire off New Cov so that theLady Luck and that unidentified freighter could escape

 He inhaled sharply, a sudden suspicion flooding into him. "Thoseships?"

 "Yes," Thrawn said, his voice grimly satisfied. "The differences between regular and slave-rigged Dreadnaughts are subtle, but visible enough when you know to look for them."

 Pellaeon frowned at the holo, trying hard to fit all of it together. "Your permission, Admiral, but it doesn't make sense for Karrde to be supplying this renegade Corellian with ships."

 "I agree," Thrawn nodded. "Obviously, someone else from that ill-fated smuggling ship also realized what it was they'd stumbled across. We're going to find that someone."

 "Do we have any leads?"

 "A few. According to Jade, they escaped from an Imperial force on the way out of a botched job. All such incidents should be on file somewhere; we'll correlate with what we know about Karrde's checkered past and see what turns up. Jade also said that the ship was badly damaged in the process of doing its second jump. If they had to go to a major spaceport for repairs, that should be on file, as well."

 "I'll put Intelligence on it immediately," Pellaeon nodded.

 "Good." Thrawn's eyes unfocused for a moment. "And I also want you to get in contact with Niles Ferrier."

 Pellaeon had to search his memory. "That ship thief you sent out to look for the Corellian's home base?"

 "That's the one," Thrawn said. "Tell him to forget the Corellian and concentrate instead on Solo and Calrissian." He cocked an eyebrow. "After all, if the Corellian is indeed planning to join the Rebellion, what better dowry could he bring than theKatana fleet?"

 The comm pinged. "Yes?" Thrawn asked.

 "Sir, the target has made the jump to lightspeed," a voice reported. "We've got a strong signal from the beacon; we're doing a probability extrapolation now.

 "Very good, Lieutenant," Thrawn said. "Don't bother with any extrapolations just yetshe'll change course at least once more before settling down on her true heading."

 "Yes, sir."

 "Still, we don't want her getting too far ahead of us," Thrawn told Pellaeon as he keyed off the comm. "You'd best return to the bridge, Captain, and get theChimaera moving after her."

 "Yes, sir." Pellaeon hesitated. "I thought we were going to give her time to get theKatana 's location for us."

 Thrawn's expression hardened. "She's not part of the Empire anymore, Captain," he said. "She may want us to believe that she's coming backshe may even believe it herself. But she isn't. No matter. She's leading us to Karrde, and that's the important thing. Between him and our Corellian renegade we have two leads to theKatana fleet. One way or the other, we'll find it."

 Pellaeon nodded, feeling the stirrings of excitement again despite his best efforts to remain unemotional about this. TheKatana fleet. Two hundred Dreadnaughts, just sitting there waiting for the Empire to take possession

 "I have the feeling, Admiral," he said, "that our final offensive against the Rebellion may be ready to launch a bit ahead of schedule."

 Thrawn smiled. "I believe, Captain, that you may be right."

 

 CHAPTER
18

 They had been sitting around the table in the maitrakh's house since early morning, studying maps and floor plans and diagrams, searching for a plan of action that would be more than simply a complicated way of surrendering. Finally, just here noon, Leia called a halt. "I can't look at this anymore," she told Chewbacca, closing her eyes briefly and rubbing her thumbs against throbbing temples. "Let's go outside for a while."

 Chewbacca growled an objection. "Yes, of course there are risks," she agreed wearily. "But the whole village knows we're here, and no one's told the authorities yet. Come on; it'll be okay." Stepping to the door, she opened it and went out. Chewbacca grumbled under his breath, hut followed after her.

 The late morning sunshine was blazing brightly down, with only a scattering of high clouds to interfere. Leia glanced upward at the clear sky, shivering involuntarily at the sudden sensation of nakedness that flooded in on her. A clear sky, all the way up to spacebut it was all right. A little before midnight the maitrakh had brought the news of the Star Destroyer's imminent departure, a departure which she and Chewbacca had been able to watch with the macrobinoculars from the Wookiee's kit. It had been their first break since Khabarakh's arrest: just as it had begun to look like she and Chewbacca would be pinned down here until it was too late, the Grand Admiral had abruptly left.

 It was an unexpected gifta gift which Leia couldn't help but view with suspicion. From the way the Grand Admiral had been talking in thedukha she'd expected him to stay here until Khabarakh's humiliation period had ended, after which the shipboard interrogation would begin. Perhaps he'd changed his mind and had taken Khabath back early, with a backhand gesture of contempt for Noghri tradition. But the maitrakh had said that Khabarakh was still on public display in the center of Nystao.

 Unless she was lying about that. Or was herself being lied to about it. But if the Grand Admiral suspected enough to lie to the maitrakh, why hadn't a legion of Imperial troops already swooped down on them?

 But he was a Grand Admiral, with all the cunning and subtlety and tactical genius that the title implied. This whole thing could be a convoluted, carefully orchestrated trapand if it was, chances were she would never even see it until it had been sprung around her.

 Stop it!she ordered herself firmly. Letting herself get caught up in the mythos of infallibility that had been built up around the Grand Admirals would gain her nothing but mental paralysis. Even Grand Admirals could make mistakes, and there were any number of reasons why he might have had to leave Honoghr. Perhaps some part of the campaign against the New Republic had gone sour, requiring his attention elsewhere. Or perhaps he'd simply gone off on some short errand, intending to be back in a day or two.

 Either way, it meant that the time to strike was now. If they could only find something to strike at.

 Beside her, Chewbacca growled a suggestion. "We can't do that," Leia shook her head. "It'd be no better than a frill-blown attack on the spaceport. We have to keep damage to Nystao and its people to an absolute minimum."

 The Wookiee snarled impatiently.

 "I don'tknow what else to do," she snapped back. "All know is that death and massive destruction won't do anything but put us back where we were before we came here. It certainly won't convince the Noghri that they should leave the Empire and come over to our side."

 She looked out past the cluster of huts at the distant hills and the brownkholm-grass rippling in the breeze. Glinting in the sunlight, the squat box shapes of a dozen decon droids were hard at work, scooping up a quarter cubic meter of topsoil with each bite, running it through some exotic catalytic magic in their interiors, and dumping the cleansed product out the back. Slowly but steadily bringing the people of Honoghr back from the edge of the destruction they'd facedand a highly visible reminder, if anyone needed it, of the Empire's benevolence toward them.

 "Lady Vader," a gravelly voice mewed from just behind her.

 Leia jumped. "Good morning, maitrakh," she said, turning and giving the Noghri a solemn nod. "I trust you are well this morning?"

 "I feel no sickness," the other said shortly.

 "Good," Leia said, the word sounding rather lame. The maitrakh hadn't been so impolite as to say anything out loud, but it was clear enough that she considered herself to be in a no-win situation here, with dishonor and perhaps even death waiting for her family as soon as the Grand Admiral discovered what Khabarakh had done. It was probably only a matter of time, Leia knew, before she came to the conclusion that turning the intruders over to the Empire herself would be the least disastrous course still open to her.

 "Your plans," the maitrakh said. "How do they go?"

 Leia glanced at Chewbacca. "We're making progress," she said. It was true enough, after a fashion: the elimination of every approach they'd come up withdid technically qualify as progress. "We still have a long way to go, though."

 "Yes," the maitrakh said. She looked out past the buildings. "Your droid has spent much time with the other machines."

 "There isn't as much here for him to do as I'd thought there would be," Leia said. "You and many of your people speak Basic better than I'd anticipated."

 "The Grand Admiral has taught us well."

 "As did my father, the Lord Darth Vader, before him," Leia reminded her.

 The maitrakh was silent a moment. "Yes," she conceded reluctantly.

 Leia felt a chill run up her back. The first step in a betrayal would be to put emotional distance between the Noghri and their former lord.

 "That area will be finished soon," the maitrakh said, pointing to the laboring decon droids. "If they finish within the next ten days, we will be able to plant there this season.

 "Will the extra land be enough to make you self-sufficient?" Leia asked.

 "It will help. But not enough."

 Leia nodded, feeling a fresh surge of frustration. To her, the Empire's scheme was as blatant as it was cynical: with careful tuning of the whole decontamination process, they could keep the Noghri on the verge of independence indefinitely without ever letting them quite make it over that line. She knew it; the maitrakh herself suspected it. But as for proving it

 "Chewie, are you familiar at all with decon droids?" she asked suddenly. This thought had occurred to her once before, but she'd never gotten around to following up on it. "Enough that you could figure out how long it would take the number of droids they have on Honoghr to decontaminate this much land?"

 The Wookiee growled an affirmative, and launched into a rundown of the relevant numbers clearly, the question had occurred to him, too. "I don't need the complete analysis right now," Leia interrupted the stream of estimates and extrapolations and rules of thumb. "Have you got a bottom line?"

 He did. Eight years.

 "I see," Leia murmured, the brief flicker of hope fading back into the overall gloom. "That would have put it right about the height of the war, wouldn't it?"

 "You still believe the Grand Admiral has deceived us?" the maitrakh accused.

 "Iknow he's deceiving you," Leia retorted. "I just can't prove it."

 The maitrakh was silent for a minute. "What then will you do?"

 Leia took a deep breath, exhaled it quietly. "We have to leave Honoghr. That means breaking into the spaceport at Nystao and stealing a ship."

 "There should be no difficulty in that for a daughter of the Lord Darth Vader."

 Leia grimaced, thinking of how the maitrakh had effortlessly sneaked up on them a minute ago. The guards at the spaceport would be younger and far better trained. These people must have been fantastic hunters before the Emperor turned them into his private killing machines. "Stealing a ship won't be too hard," she told the maitrakh, aware of just how far she was stretching the truth here. "The difficulty arises from the fact that we have to take Khabarakh with us."

 The maitrakh stopped short. "What is that you say?" she hissed.

 "It's the only way," Leia said. "If Khabarakh is left to the Empire, they'll make him tell everything that's occurred here. And when that happens, he and you will both die. Perhaps your whole family with you. We can't allow that."

 "Then you face death yourselves," the maitrakh said. "The guards will not easily allow Khabarakh to be freed."

 "I know," Leia said, acutely aware of the two small lives she carried within her. "We'll have to take that risk."

 "There will be no honor in such a sacrifice," the old Noghri all but snarled. "The clan Kihm'bar will not carve it into history. Neither will the Noghri people long remember."

 "I'm not doing it for the praise of the Noghri people," Leia sighed, suddenly weary of banging her head against alien misunderstandings. She'd been doing it in one form or another, it seemed, for the whole of her life. "I'm doing it because I'm tired of people dying for my mistakes. I asked Khabarakh to bring me to Honoghrwhat's happened is my responsibility. I can't just run off and leave you to the Grand Admiral's vengeance."

 "Our lord the Grand Admiral would not deal so harshly with us."

 Leia turned to look the maitrakh straight in the eye. "The Empire once destroyed an entire world because of me," she said quietly. "I don't ever want that to happen again."

 She held the maitrakh's gaze a moment longer, then turned away, her mind twisted in a tangle of conflicting thoughts and emotions. Was she doing the right thing?

 She'd risked her life countless times before, but always for her comrades in the Rebellion and for a cause she believed in. To do the same for servants of the Empireeven servants who'd been duped into that rolewas something else entirely. Chewbacca didn't like any of this; she could tell that much from his sense and the stiff way he stood at her side. But he would go along, driven by his own sense of honor and the life-debt he had sworn to Han.

 She blinked back sudden tears, her hand going to the bulge of her belly. Han would understand. He would argue against such a risk, but down deep he would understand. Otherwise, he wouldn't have let her come here in the first place.

 If she didn't return, he would almost certainly blame himself.

 "The humiliation period has been extended for four more days," the maitrakh murmured beside her. "In two days' time the moons will give their least light. It would be best to wait until then."

 Leia frowned at her. The maitrakh met her gaze steadily, her alien face unreadable. "Are you offering me your help?" Leia asked.

 "There is honor in you, Lady Vader," the maitrakh said, her voice quiet. "For the life and honor of my thirdson, I will go with you. Perhaps we will die together."

 Leia nodded, her heart aching. "Perhaps we will."

 But she wouldn't. The maitrakh and Khabarakh might die, and probably Chewbacca beside them. But not her. The Lady Vader they would take alive, and save as a gift for their lord the Grand Admiral.

 Who would smile, and speak politely, and take her children away from her.

 She looked out at the fields, wishing Han were here. And wondered if he would ever know what had happened to her.

 "Come," the maitrakh said. "Let us return to the house. There are many things about Nystao which you must yet learn."

 

 "I'm glad you finally called," Winter's voice came over theLady Luck 's speaker, distorted slightly by a not quite attuned scrambler package. "I was starting to worry."

 "We're okaywe just had to run silent awhile," Han assured her. "You got trouble back there?"

 "No more than when you left," she said. "The Imperials are still hitting our shipping out there, and no one's figured out what to do about it. Fey'lya's trying to persuade the Council that he could do a better job of defense than Ackbar's people, but so far Mon Mothma hasn't taken him up on the offer. I get the feeling that some of the Council members are starting to have second thoughts about his motivations for all of this."

 "Good," Han growled. "Maybe they'll tell him to shut up and put Ackbar back in command."

 "Unfortunately, Fey'lya's still got too much support to ignore completely," Winter said. "Particularly among the military."

 "Yeah." Han braced himself. "I don't suppose you ve heard from Leia."

 "Not yet," Winter said; and Han could hear the underlying tension in her voice. She was worried, too. "But Idid hear from Luke. That's why I wanted to get in touch with you, in fact."

 "Is he in trouble?"

 "I don't knowthe message didn't say. He wants you to rendezvous with him on New Cov."

 "New Cov?" Han frowned down at the cloudspeckled planet turning beneath them. "Why?"

 "The message didn't say. Just that he'd meet you at the, quote, money-changing center, unquote.

 "The?" Han shifted his frown to Lando. "What's that supposed to mean?"

 "He's talking about the Mishra tapcafe in Ilic where he and I met while you were following Breil'lya," Lando said. "Private jokeI'll fill you in later."

 "So that means there's no question Luke sent the message?" Winter asked.

 "Wait a minute," Han put in as Lando started to answer. "Didn't you talk to him personally?"

 "No, the message came in printed," Winter said. "Not on any scrambler, either."

 "He doesn't have a scrambler on his X-wing, does he?" Lando asked.

 "No, but he could get a message coded at any New Republic diplomatic post," Han said slowly. "Is this private joke something only you two would know about?"

 "Us two, plus maybe a hundred bystanders," Lando conceded. "You think it's a trap?"

 "Could be. Okay, Winter, thanks. We'll be checking in more often from now on.

 "All right. Be careful."

 "You bet."

 He signed off and looked at Lando. "It's your ship, pal. You want to go down and take a look, or give it a miss and go check out this swimming casino of yours?"

 Lando hissed a breath between his teeth. "I don't think we've got much choice," he said. "If the messagewas from Luke, it's probably important."

 "And if it wasn't?"

 Lando favored him with a tight grin. "Hey, we've run Imperial traps before. Come on, let's take her down."

 After the way they'd blasted out of Ilic a few days earlier, it was doubtful the local authorities would be especially overjoyed to see the return of theLady Luck to their city. Fortunately, he'd put the past two days' worth of leisure time to good use; and as they set down inside the domed landing area, the spaceport computer dutifully logged the arrival of the pleasure yachtTamar's Folly .

 "It's just terrific to be back," Han commented dryly as he and Lando started down the ramp. "Probably ought to snoop around a little before we head down to the Mishra.

 Beside him, Lando stiffened. "I don't think we're going to have to bother with the Mishra," he said quietly.

 Han threw a quick glance at him, dropping his hand casually to his blaster as he shifted his gaze to where Lando was looking. Standing five meters from the end of theLady Luck 's ramp was a bulky man in an ornate tunic, chewing on the end of a cigarra, and smiling with sly innocence up at them.

 "Friend of yours?" Han murmured.

 "I wouldn't gothat far," Lando murmured back. "Name's Niles Ferrier. Ship thief and occasional smuggler."

 "He was in on the Mishra thing, I take it?"

 "One of the key players, actually."

 Han nodded, letting his eyes drift around the spaceport. Among the dozens of people moving briskly about their business, he spotted three or four who seemed to be loitering nearby. "Ship thief huh?"

 "Yes, but he's not going to bother with anything as small as theLady Luck ," Lando assured him.

 Han grunted. "Watch him anyway.

 "You bet."

 They reached the foot of the ramp and, by unspoken but mutual consent, stopped there and waited. Ferrier's grin broadened a bit, and he sauntered forward to meet them. "Hello there, Calrissian," he said. "We keep bumping into each other, don't we?"

 "Hello, Luke," Han spoke up before Lando could reply. "You've changed."

 Ferrier's smile turned almost sheepish. "Yeahsorry about that. I didn't figure you'd come if I put my own name on the message."

 "Where's Luke?" Han demanded.

 "Search me," Ferrier shrugged. "He burned out of here same time you didthat was the last I saw of him."

 Han studied his face, looking for a lie. He didn't see one. "What do you want?"

 "I want to cut a deal with the New Republic," Ferrier said, lowering his voice. "A deal for some new warships. You interested?"

 Han felt a tingle at the back of his neck. "We might be," he said, trying to sound casual. "What kind of ships are we talking about?"

 Ferrier gestured to the ramp. "How about we talk in the ship?"

 "How about we talk out here?" Lando retorted.

 Ferrier seemed taken aback. "Take it easy, Calrissian," he said soothingly. "What do you think I'm going to do, walk off with your ship in my pocket?"

 "What kind of ships?" Han repeated.

 Ferrier looked at him for a moment, then made a show of glancing around the area. "Big ones," he said, lowering his voice. "Dreadnaught class." He lowered his voice still (further. "TheKatana fleet."

 With an effort, Han kept his sabacc face in place. "TheKatana fleet. Right."

 "I'm not kidding," Ferrier insisted. "TheKatana 's been found and I've got a line on the guy who found it."

 "Yeah?" Han said. Something in Ferrier's face

 He turned around quickly, half expecting to see someone trying to sneak up over the edge of the ramp into theLady Luck . But aside from the usual mix of shadows from the spaceport lights, there was nothing there. "Something?" Lando demanded.

 "No," Han said, turning back to Ferrier. If the thief really did have a line on Bel Iblis's supplier, it could save them a lot of time. But if he had nothing but rumorsand was maybe hoping to wangle something a little more solid "What makes you think this guy has anything?" he demanded.

 Ferrier smiled slyly. "Free information, Solo? Come onyou know better than that."

 "All right, then," Lando said. "What do you want from us, and what are you offering in trade?"

 "I know the guy's name," Ferrier said, his face turning serious again. "But I don't know where he is. I thought we could pool our resources, see if we can get to him before the Empire does."

 Han felt his throat tighten. "What makes you think the Empire's involved?"

 Ferrier threw him a scornful look. "With Grand Admiral Thrawn in charge over there? He's involved in everything."

 Han smiled lopsidedly. At last they had a name to go with the uniform. "Thrawn, huh? Thanks, Ferrier."

 Ferrier's face went rigid as he suddenly realized what he'd just given away. "No charge," he said between stiff lips.

 "We still haven't heard what we're getting out of the deal," Lando reminded him.

 "Do you know where he is?" Ferrier asked.

 "We have a lead," Lando said. "What are you offering?"

 Ferrier shifted a measuring gaze back and forth between them. "I'll give you half the ships we take out," he said at last. "Plus an option for the New Republic to buy out the rest at a reasonable price."

 "What's a reasonable price?" Han asked.

 "Depends on what kind of shape they're in," Ferrier countered. "I'm sure we'll be able to come to an agreement.

 "Mn." Han looked at Lando. "What do you think?"

 "Forget it," Lando said, his voice hard. "You want to give us the name, fineif it checks out, we'll make sure you're well paid once we've got the ships. Otherwise, shove off."

 Ferrier drew back. "Well, fine," he said, sounding more hurt than annoyed. "You want to do it all by yourselves, be my guest. But if we get to the ships first, your precious little New Republic's going to pay a lot more to get them. Alot more."

 Spinning around, he stalked off. "Come on, Han, let's get out of here," Lando muttered, his eyes on Ferrier's retreating back.

 "Yeah," Han said, looking around for the loiterers he'd spotted earlier. They, too, were drifting away. It didn't look like trouble; but he kept his hand on his blaster anyway until they were inside theLady Luck with the hatch sealed.

 "I'll prep for lift," Lando said as they headed back to the cockpit. "You talk to Control, get us an exit slot."

 "Okay," Han said. "You know, with a little more bargaining"

 "I don't trust him," Lando cut him off, running his hand over the start-up switches. "He was smiling too much. And he gave up too easily."

 It was a hard comment to argue against. And as Han had noted earlier, itwas Lando's ship. Shrugging to himself he keyed for spaceport control.

 They were out in ten minutes, once again leaving an unhappy group of controllers behind them. "I hope this is the last time we have to come here," Han said, scowling across the cockpit at Lando. "I get the feeling we've worn out our welcome."

 Lando threw him a sideways glance. "Well, well. Since when did you start caring what other people thought about you?"

 "Since I married a princess and started carrying a government ID," Han growled back. "Anyway, I thought you were supposed to be respectable, too."

 "It comes and goes. Ah-ha." He smiled humorlessly at Han. "It looks like while we were talking to Ferrier, someone sneaked up and put something on our hull. Ten'll get you one it's a homing beacon."

 "What a surprise," Han said, keying his display for its location. It was on the rear lower hull, back near the ramp where it would be out of most of the lift-off turbulence.

 "What do you want to do with it?"

 "The Terrijo system's more or less on the way to Pantolomin," Lando said, consulting his display. "We'll swing through there and drop it off."

 "Okay." Han scowled at his display. "Too bad we can't put it on another ship right here. That way he wouldn't even know what direction we're going."

 Lando shook his head. "He'll know we've spotted it if we put down on New Cov now. Unless you want to take it off up here and try to toss it onto another passing ship." He glanced at Han; paused for a longer look. "We're not going to try it, Han," he said firmly. "Get that look out of your eye.

 "Oh, all right," Han grumbled. "That'd get him off our backs, though."

 "And might get you killed in the process," Lando retorted. "And thenI'd have to go back and explain it to Leia. Forget it."

 Han gritted his teeth. Leia. "Yeah," he said with a sigh.

 Lando looked at him again. "Come on, buddy, relax. Ferrier hasn't got a hope of beating us. Trust mewe re going to win this one."

 Han nodded. He hadn't been thinking about Ferrier, actually. Or about theKatana fleet. "I know," he said.

 

 TheLady Luck disappeared smoothly through one of the ducts in the transparisteel dome, and Ferrier shifted his cigarra to the other side of his mouth. "You're sure they won't find the second beacon?" he asked.

 Beside him, the oddly shaped shadow between a pile of shipping crates stirred. "They will not," it said in a voice like cold running water.

 "You'd better be right," Ferrier warned, a note of menace in his voice. "I didn't stand there and take that garbage from them for nothing." He glared at the shadow. "As it was, you almost gave the game away," he said accusingly. "Solo looked straight back at you once.

 "There was no danger," the wraith said flatly. "Humans need movement to see. Not-moving shadows are of no concern."

 "Well, it worked this time," Ferrier was willing to concede. "You're still lucky it was Solo and not Calrissian who lookedhe saw you once before, you know. Next time, keep your big feet quiet.

 The wraith said nothing. "Oh, go on, get back to the ship," Ferrier ordered. "Tell Abric to get 'er ready to lift. We've got ourselves a fortune to make."

 He threw a last look upward. "And maybe," he added with grim satisfaction, "a smart-mouthed gambler to take out."

 

 CHAPTER
19

 TheEtherway was clearly visible now, dropping like a misshapen rock out of the sky toward its assigned landing pit. Standing in the protective shadow of the exit tunnel, Karrde watched its approach, stroking the grip of his blaster gently with his fingertips and trying to ignore the uneasiness still tickling the back of his mind. Mara was over three days late in bringing the freighter back from Abregadonot a particularly significant delay under normal conditions, but this trip had hardly qualified as normal. But there had been no other ships on her tail as she entered orbit, and she'd transmitted all the proper "all clear" code signals to him as she dropped into the approach pattern. And aside from the incompetence of the controllers, who'd taken an inordinate amount of time to decide which pit she was actually being assigned to, the landing itself had so far been completely routine.

 Karrde smiled wryly as he watched the ship come down. There had been times in the past three days when he'd thought about Mara's hatred of Luke Skywalker, and had wondered if she had decided to drop out of his life as mysteriously as she'd dropped into it. But it seemed now that his original reading of her had been correct. Mara Jade wasn't the sort of person who gave her loyalty easily, but once she'd made a decision she stuck with it. If she ever ran out on him, she wouldn't do so in a stolen ship. Not stolen from him, anyway.

 TheEtherway was on its final approach now, rotating on its repulsorlifts to orient its hatchway toward the exit tunnel. Obviously, Karrde's reading of Han Solo had been correct, too. Even if the other hadn't been quite gullible enough to send a Mon Cal Star Cruiser out to Myrkr, he'd at least kept his promise to get theEtherway out of impoundment. Apparently, all of Karrde's private worrying of the past three days had been for nothing.

 But the uneasiness was still there.

 With a hiss of back-release outgassing, theEtherway settled to the stress-scored paving of the landing pit. His eyes on the closed hatchway, Karrde pulled his comlink from his belt and thumbed for his backup spotter. "Dankin? Anything suspicious in sight?"

 "Not a thing," the other's voice came back promptly. "Looks very quiet over there."

 Karrde nodded. "All right. Keep out of sight, but stay alert."

 He replaced the comlink in his belt. TheEtherway 's landing ramp began to swing down, and he shifted his hand to a grip on his blaster. If this was a trap, now would be the likely time to spring it.

 The hatchway opened, and Mara appeared. She glanced around the pit as she started down the ramp, spotting him immediately in his chosen shadow. "Karrde?" she called.

 "Welcome home, Mara," he said, stepping out into the light. "You're a bit late."

 "I wound up making a little detour," she said grimly, coming toward him.

 "That can happen," he said, frowning. Her attention was still flitting around the pit, her face lined with a vague sort of tension. "Trouble?" he asked quietly.

 "I don't know," she murmured. "I feel" She never finished the sentence. At Karrde's belt his comlink suddenly squawked, screeched briefly with the electronic stress of blanket jamming, and then went silent. "Come on," Karrde snapped, drawing his blaster and spinning back toward the exit. At the far end of the tunnel he could see shapes moving; lifting his blaster, he fired toward the violent thunderclap of a sonic boom shattered the air around him, slamming hard against his head and nearly toppling him to the ground. He glanced up, ears ringing, just as two slower-moving TIE fighters swooped past overhead, laying down a spitting pattern of laser fire at the mouth of the exit tunnel. The paving erupted into steaming blocks of half-molten ceramic under the assault, blocking any chance of quick escape in that direction. Kaerde snapped off a reflexive if meaningless shot toward the TIE fighters; and he was just beginning to shift his aim back toward the figures in the tunnel when a dozen stormtroopers suddenly leaped into view at the upper rim of the landing pit, sliding down droplines to the ground. "Down!" he snapped at Mara, his voice hardly audible to his paralyzed sense of hearing. He dived for the ground, hitting awkwardly on his left arm and bringing his blaster to bear on the nearest stormtrooper. He fired, missing by half a meterand he was just noticing the curious fact that the Imperials weren't returning fire when the blaster was deftly plucked from his hand.

 He rolled half over, looking up at Mara with stunned disbelief. "What"

 She was standing over him, her face so pinched with emotion he could hardly recognize it, her lips moving with words he couldn't hear.

 But he didn't really need any explanation. Strangely, he felt no anger at her; not for concealing her Imperial past from him all this time, nor for now returning to her origins. Only chagrin that he'd been fooled so easily and so thoroughly and a strange regret that he had lost such a skilled associate.

 The stormtroopers hauled him to his feet and moved him roughly toward a drop ship that was settling onto the paving beside theEtherway ; and as he stumbled toward it, a stray thought occurred to him.

 He was betrayed and captured and probably facing death but at least he now had a partial answer to the mystery of why Mara wanted to kill Luke Skywalker.

 

 Mara glared at the Grand Admiral, her hands curled into fists, her body trembling with rage. "Eight days, Thrawn," she snarled, her voice echoing oddly through the background noises of theChimaera 's vast shuttle bay. "You said eight days. Youpromised me eight days."

 Thrawn gazed back with a polite calmness that made her long to burn him down where he stood. "I changed my mind," he said coolly. "It occurred to me that Karrde might not only refuse to divulge theKatana fleet's location, but might even abandon you here for suggesting that he make such a deal with us."

 "The gates of hell you did," Mara snapped back. "You planned to use me like this right from the start."

 "And it got us what we wanted," the red-eyed freak said smoothly. "That's all that matters."

 Deep within Mara, something snapped. Ignoring the armed stormtroopers standing just behind her, she threw herself at Thrawn, fingers hooking like a hunting bird's talons for his throat

 And came to an abrupt bone-wrenching stop as Thrawn's Noghri bodyguard sidled in from two meters away, threw his arm across her neck and shoulder, and spun her around and halfway to the deck.

 She grabbed at the iron-hard arm across her throat, simultaneously throwing her right elbow back toward his torso. But the blow missed; and even as she shifted to a two-handed grip on his arm, white spots began to flicker in her vision. His forearm was pressing solidly against her carotid artery, threatening her with unconsciousness.

 There wasn't anything to be gained by blacking out. She relaxed her struggle, felt the pressure ease. Thrawn was still standing there, regarding her with amusement. "That was very unprofessional of you, Emperor's Hand," he chided.

 Mara glared at him and lashed out again, this time with the Force. Thrawn frowned slightly, fingers moving across his neck as if trying to brush away an intangible cobweb. Mara leaned into her tenuous grip on his throat; and he brushed again at his neck before understanding came. "All right, that's enough," he said, his voice noticeably altered, his tone starting to get angry. "Stop it, or Rukh will have to hurt you."

 Mara ignored the order, digging in as hard as she could. Thrawn gazed unblinkingly back at her, his throat muscles moving as he fought against the grip. Mara clenched her teeth, waiting for the order or hand movement that would signal permission for the Noghri to choke her, or for the stormtroopers to burn her down.

 But Thrawn remained silent and unmoving and a minute later, gasping for breath, Mara had to concede defeat.

 "I trust you've learned the limits of your small powers," Thrawn said coldly, fingering his throat. But at least he didn't sound amused anymore. "A little trick the Emperor taught you?"

 "He taught me a great many tricks," Mara bit out, ignoring the throbbing in her temples. "How to deal with traitors was one of them."

 Thrawn's glowing eyes glittered. "Have a care, Jade," he said softly. "Irule the Empire now. Not some long-dead Emperor; certainly not you. The only treason is defiance of my orders. I'm willing to let you come back to your rightful place in the Empireas first officer, perhaps, of one of theKatana Dreadnaughts. But any further outbursts like this one and that offer will be summarily withdrawn."

 "And then you'll kill me, I suppose," Mara growled. "My Empire isn't in the habit of wasting valuable resources, the other countered. "You'd be given instead to Master C'baoth as a little bonus gift. And I suspect you would soon wish I'd had you executed."

 Mara stared at him, an involuntary shiver running up her back. "Who is C'baoth?"

 "Joruus C'baoth is a mad Jedi Master," Thrawn told her darkly. "He's consented to help our war effort, in exchange for Jedi to mold into whatever twisted image he chooses. Your friend Skywalker has already walked into his web; his sister, Organa Solo, we hope to deliver soon." His face hardened. "I would genuinely hate for you to have to join them."

 Mara took a deep breath. "I understand," she said, forcing out the words. "You've made your point. It won't happen again."

 He eyed her a moment, then nodded. "Apology accepted," he said. "Release her, Rukh. Now. Do I take it you wish to rejoin the Empire?"

 The Noghri let go of her neckreluctantly, Mara thoughtand took a short step away. "What about the rest of Karrde's people?" she asked.

 "As we agreed, they're free to go about their business. I've already canceled all Imperial search and detention orders concerning them, and Captain Pellaeon is at this moment calling off the bounty hunters."

 "And Karrde himself?"

 Thrawn studied her face. "He'll remain aboard until he tells me where theKatana fleet is. If he does so with a minimum of wasted time and effort on our part, he'll receive the three million in compensation which you and I agreed on at Endor. If notthere may not be much left of him to pay compensation to."

 Mara felt her lip twitch. He wasn't bluffing, either. She'd seen what a full-bore Imperial interrogation could do. "May I talk to him?" she asked.

 "Why?"

 "I might be able to persuade him to cooperate."

 Thrawn smiled slightly. "Or could at least assure him that you did not, in fact, betray him?"

 "He'll still be locked in your detention block," Mara reminded him, forcing her voice to stay calm. "There's no reason for him not to know the truth."

 Thrawn lifted his eyebrows. "On the contrary," he said. "A sense of utter abandonment is one of the more useful psychological tools available to us. A few days with only thoughts of that sort to relieve the monotony may convince him to cooperate without harsher treatment."

 "Thrawn" Mara broke off, strangling back the sudden flash of anger.

 "That's better," the Grand Admiral approved, his eyes steady on her face. "Especially considering that the alternative is for me to turn him directly over to an interrogator droid. Is that what you want?"

 "No, Admiral," she said, feeling herself slump a little. "I just  Karrde helped me when I had nowhere else to go.

 "I understand your feelings," Thrawn said, his face hardening again. "But they have no place here. Mixed loyalties are a luxury no officer of the Imperial Fleet can afford. Certainly not if she wishes someday to be given a command of her own."

 Mara drew herself up again to her full height. "Yes, sir. It won't happen again."

 "I trust not." Thrawn glanced past her shoulder and nodded. With a rustle of movement, her stormtrooper escort began to withdraw. "The deck officer's station is just beneath the control tower," he said, gesturing to the large transparisteel bubble nestled in among the racked TIE fighters three-quarters of the way up the hangar bay's back wall. "He'll assign you a shuttle and pilot to take you back to the surface."

 It was clearly a dismissal. "Yes, Admiral," Mara said. Stepping past him, she headed toward the door he'd indicated. For a moment she could feel his eyes on her, then heard the faint sound of his footsteps as he turned away toward the lift cluster beyond the starboard blast doors.

 Yes; the Grand Admiral had made his point. But it wasn't exactly the one he'd intended to make. With that single casual act of betrayal, he had finally destroyed her last wistful hope that the new Empire might someday measure up to the one that Luke Skywalker had destroyed out from under her.

 The Empire she'd once been proud to serve was gone. Forever.

 It was a painful revelation, and a costly one. It could erase in one stroke everything she'd worked so hard to build up for herself over the last year.

 It could also cost Karrde his life. And if it did, he would die believing that she had deliberately betrayed him to Thrawn.

 The thought twisted in her stomach like a heated knife, mixing with her bitter anger toward Thrawn for lying to her and her shame at her own gullibility in trusting him in the first place. No matter how she looked at it, this mess was her fault.

 It was up to her to fix it.

 Beside the door to the deck officer's office was the huge archway that led from the hangar bay proper into the service and prep areas behind it. Mara threw a glance over her shoulder as she walked, and spotted Thrawn stepping into one of the turbolifts, his tame Noghri at his side. Her stormtrooper escort, too, had disappeared, its members probably returning to their private section aft for debriefing over the mission they'd just completed. There were twenty or thirty other people in the bay, but none of them seemed to be paying any particular attention to her.

 It was probably the only chance she would ever get. With her ear cocked for the shoutor the blaster shotthat would mean she'd been noticed, she bypassed the deck officer's office and stepped past the retracted blast doors into the prep area.

 There was a computer terminal just inside the archway, built against the wall where it would be accessible to both the forward prep area and the aft hangar bay. Its location made it an obvious target for unauthorized access, and as a consequence it would undoubtedly be protected by an elaborate entry code. Probably changed hourly, if she knew Thrawn; but what even a Grand Admiral might not know was that the Emperor had had a private back door installed into the main computer of every Star Destroyer. It had been his guarantee, first during his consolidation of power and then during the upheaval of Rebellion, that no commander could ever lock him out of his own ships. Not him, and not his top agents.

 Mara keyed in the backdoor entry code, permitting herself a tight smile as she did so. Thrawn could consider her a glorified courier if he liked. But she knew better.

 The code clicked, and she was in.

 She called up a directory, trying to suppress the creepy awareness that she might already have brought the stormtroopers down on top of her. The backdoor code was hard wired into the system and impossible to eliminate, but if Thrawn suspected its existence, he might well have set a flag to trigger an alarm if it was ever used. And if he had, it would take far more than another show of humble loyalty to keep her out of trouble.

 No stormtroopers had appeared by the time the directory came up. She keyed for the detention section and flicked her eye down the listing, wishing fleetingly that she had an R2 astromech droid like Skywalker's to help cut through all of it. Even if Thrawn had missed the backdoor code, he would certainly have alerted the deck officer to expect her. If someone in the control tower noticed she was overdue and sent someone out to look for her

 There it was: an updated prisoner list. She keyed for it, pulling up a diagram of the entire detention block while she was at it. A duty roster was next, with attention paid to the shift changes, then back to the daily orders and a listing of theChimaera 's projected course and destinations for the next six days. Thrawn had implied he would be waiting a few days before beginning a formal interrogation, letting boredom and tension and Karrde's own imagination wear down his resistance. Mara could only hope she could get back before that softening-up period was over.

 A drop of sweat trickled down her spine as she cleared the display. And now came the really painful part. She'd run through the logic a dozen times while walking across the hangar bay deck, and each time had been forced to the same odious answer. Karrde would almost certainly have had a backup spotter watching theEtherway 's approach, who would have had a front-row view of the stormtroopers' trap. If Mara now returned free and clear from theChimaera , she would never be able to convince Karrde's people that she hadn't betrayed him to the Imperials. She'd be lucky, in fact, if they didn't burn her down on sight.

 She couldn't rescue Karrde alone. She couldn't expect any help from his organization. Which left only one person in the galaxy she might be able to enlist. Only one person who might possibly feel he owed Karrde something.

 Clenching her teeth, she keyed for the current location of a Jedi Master named Joruus C'baoth.

 It seemed to take the computer an inordinate amount of time to dig out the information, and the skin on Mara's back was starting to crawl by the time the machine finally spat it out. She caught the planet's nameJomarkand keyed off, doing what she could to bury the fact that this interaction had ever taken place. Already she'd pushed her timing way too close to the wire; and if they caught her here on a computer she shouldn't have been able to access at all, she was likely to find herself in the cell next to Karrde's.

 She barely made it. She'd just finished her cleanup and started back toward the archway when a young officer and three troopers came striding through from the hangar bay, their eyes and weapons clearly ready for trouble. One of the troopers spotted her, muttered something to the officer

 "Excuse me," Mara called as all four turned to her. "Can you tell me where I can find the deck officer?"

 "I'm the deck officer," the officer said, scowling at her as the group came to a halt in front of her. "You Mara Jade?"

 "Yes," Mara said, putting on her best unconcernedly innocent expression. "I was told your office was over here somewhere, but I couldn't find it."

 "It's on the other side of the wall," the officer growled. Brushing past her, he stepped to the terminal she'd just left. "Were you fiddling with this?" he asked, tapping a few keys.

 "No," Mara assured him. "Why?"

 "Never mind it's still locked down," the officer muttered under his breath. For a moment he looked around the area, as if searching for some other reason Mara might have wanted to be back here. But there was nothing; and almost reluctantly, he brought his attention back to her again. "I've got orders to give you transport down to the planet."

 "I know," she nodded. "I'm ready."

 

 The shuttle lifted and turned and headed off into the sky. Standing by theEtherway 's ramp, the stink of burned paving still thick in the air, Mara watched the Imperial craft disappear over the top of the landing pit. "Aves?" she called. "Come on, Aves, you've got to be here somewhere."

 "Turn around and put your hands up," the voice came from the shadows inside the ship's hatchway. "All the way up. Ai,d don't forget I know about that little sleeve gun of yours.

 "The Imperials have it now," Mara said as she turned her back to him and raised her hands. "And I'm not here for a fight. I came for help."

 "You want help, go to your new friends upstairs," Aves retorted. "Or maybe they were always your friends, huh?"

 He was goading her, Mara knew, pushing for a chance to vent his own anger and frustration in an argument or gun battle. "I didn't betray him, Aves," she said. "I got picked up by the Imperials and blew them a smoke ring that I thought would buy us enough time to get out. It didn't."

 "I don't believe you," Aves said flatly. There was a muffled clank of boot on metal as he came cautiously down the ramp.

 "No, you believe me," Mara shook her head. "You wouldn't have come here if you didn't."

 She felt a breath of air on the back of her neck as he stepped close behind her. "Don't move," he ordered. Reaching carefully to her left arm, he pulled the sleeve down to reveal the empty holster. He checked her other sleeve, then ran a hand down each side of her body. "All right, turn around," he said, stepping back again.

 She did so. He was standing a meter away from her, his face tight, his blaster pointed at her stomach. "Turn the question around, Aves," she suggested. "If I betrayed Karrde to the Imperials, why would I come back here? Especially alone?"

 "Maybe you needed to get something from theEtherway ," he countered harshly. "Or maybe it's just a trick to try to round up the rest of us."

 Mara braced herself. "If you really believe that," she said quietly, "you might as well go ahead and shoot. I can't get Karrde out of there without your help."

 For a long minute Aves stood there in silence. Mara watched his face, trying to ignore the white-knuckled hand holding the blaster. "The others won't help you, you know," he said. "Half of them think you've been manipulating Karrde from the minute you joined up. Most of the rest figure you for the type who switches loyalties twice a year anyway.

 Mara grimaced. "That was true once, she admitted. "Not anymore.

 "You got any way to prove that?"

 "Yeahby getting Karrde out," Mara retorted. "Look, I haven't got time to talk. You going to help, or shoot?"

 He hesitated for a handful of heartbeats. Then, almost reluctantly, he lowered the blaster until it was pointed at the ground. "I'm probably scribing my own death mark," he growled. "What do you need?"

 "For starters, a ship," Mara said, silently letting out a breath she hadn't realized she'd been holding. "Something smaller and faster than theEtherway . One of those three boosted Skipray blastboats we brought in from Vagran would do nicely. I'll also need one of those ysalamiri we've been carrying around on theWild Karrde . Preferably on a nutrient frame that's portable."

 Aves frowned. "What do you want with an ysalamir?"

 "I'm going to talk to a Jedi," she said briefly. "I need a guarantee he'll listen."

 Aves studied her a moment, then shrugged. "I suppose I really don't want to know. What else?"

 Mara shook her head. "That's it."

 His eyes narrowed. "That'sit ?"

 "That's it. How soon can you get them to me?"

 Aves pursed his lips thoughtfully. "Let's say an hour," he said. "That big swamp about fifty kilometers north of the city-you know it?"

 Mara nodded. "There's a soggy sort of island near the eastern edge."

 "Right. You bring theEtherway to the island and we do the switch there." He glanced up at the freighter towering over him. "If you think it's safe to move it."

 "It should be for now," Mara said. "Thrawn told me he'd lifted all the search and detention orders for the rest of the group. But you'd better disappear anyway after I go. He'll have the whole Fleet screaming down your necks again if and when I get Karrde out. Better run a fine-edge scan on theEtherway before you take it anywhere, thoughthere has to be a homing beacon aboard for Thrawn to have gotten the jump on me the way he did." She felt her lip twitch. "And knowing Thrawn, he's probably got someone tailing me, too. I'll have to get rid of him before I leave the planet."

 "I can give you a hand with that," Aves said grimly. "We're disappearing anyway, right?"

 "Right." Mara paused, trying to think if there was anything else she needed to tell him. "I guess that's it. Let's get going."

 "Right." Aves hesitated. "I still don't know whose side you're on, Mara. If you're on oursgood luck."

 She nodded, feeling a hard lump settle into her throat. "Thanks."

 

 Two hours later she was strapped into the Skipray's cockpit, a strange and unpleasant sense of dj vu burning through her as she drove toward deep space. It had been in a ship just like this one that she'd screamed off into the sky over the Myrkr forest a few weeks ago, in hot pursuit of an escaped prisoner. Now, like a twisted repeat of history, she once again found herself chasing after Luke Skywalker.

 Only this time, she wasn't trying to kill or capture him. This time, she was going to plead for his help.

 

 CHAPTER
20

 The last pair of villagers detached themselves from the group standing at the back wall and made their way to ward the raised judgment seat. C'baoth stood there, watching them come; and then, as Luke had known he would, the Jedi Master stood up. "Jedi Skywalker," he said, gesturing Luke to the seat. "The final case of the evening is yours."

 "Yes, Master C'baoth," Luke said, bracing himself as he stepped over and gingerly sat down. It was, to his mind, a thoroughly uncomfortable chair: too warm, too large, and far too ornate. Even more than the rest of C'baoth's home, it had an alien smell to it, and a strangely disturbing aura that Luke could only assume was a lingering aftereffect of the hours the Jedi Master had spent in it judging his people.

 Now it was Luke's turn to do so.

 Taking a deep breath, trying to push back the fatigue that had become a permanent part of him, he nodded at the two villagers. "I'm ready," he said. "Please begin."

 It was a relatively simple case, as such things went. The first villager's livestock had gotten through the second's fence and had stripped half a dozen of his fruit bushes before they'd been discovered and driven back. The animals' owner was willing to pay compensation for the ruined bushes, but the second was insisting that he also rebuild the fence. The first countered that a properly built fence wouldn't have failed in the first place and that, furthermore, his livestock had suffered injuries from the sharp edges as they went through. Luke sat quietly and let them talk, waiting until the arguments and counterarguments finally ended.

 "All right," he said. "In the matter of the fruit bushes themselves, my judgment is that you"he nodded to the first villager"will pay for the replacement of those damaged beyond repair, plus an additional payment to compensate for the fruit eaten or destroyed by your livestock. The latter amount will be determined by the village council."

 Beside him C'baoth stirred, and Luke winced at the disapproval he could sense from the Jedi Master. For a second he floundered, wondering if he should back up and try a different solution. But changing his mind so abruptly didn't sound like a good thing to do. And anyway, he really didn't have any better ideas.

 So what was he doing here?

 He looked around the room, fighting against a sudden flush of nervousness. They were all looking at him: C'baoth, the two supplicants, the rest of the villagers who'd come tonight for Jedi judgment. All of them expecting him to make the right decision.

 "As to the fence, I'll examine it tomorrow morning," he continued. "I want to see how badly it was damaged before I make my decision.

 The two men bowed and backed away. "I therefore declare this session to be closed," C'baoth called. His voice echoed grandly, despite the relatively small size of the room. An interesting effect, and Luke found himself wondering if it was a trick of the room's acoustics or yet another Jedi technique that Master Yoda had never taught him. Though why he would ever need such a technique he couldn't imagine.

 The last of the villagers filed out of the room. C'baoth cleared his throat; reflexively, Luke braced himself. "I sometimes wonder, Jedi Skywalker," the old man said gravely, "whether or not you have really been listening to me these past few days.

 "I'm sorry, Master C'baoth," Luke said, an all too familiar lump sticking in his throat. No matter how hard he tried, it seemed, he was never quite able to measure up to C'baoth's expectations.

 "Sorry?" C'baoth's eyebrows rose sardonically. "Sorry? Jedi Skywalker, you had it all right there in your hands. You should have cut off their prattle far sooner than you didyour time is too valuable to waste with petty recriminations. You should have made the decision yourself on the amount of compensation, but instead gave it over to that absurd excuse of a village council. And as to the fence" He shook his head in mild disgust. "There was absolutely no reason for you to postpone judgment on that. Everything you needed to know about the damage was right there in their minds. It should have been no trouble, even for you, to have pulled that from them."

 Luke swallowed. "Yes, Master C'baoth," he said. "But reading another person's thoughts that way seems wrong"

 "When you are using that knowledge to help him?" C'baoth countered. "How can that be wrong?"

 Luke waved a hand helplessly. "I'm trying to understand, Master C'baoth. But this is all so new to me."

 C'baoth's bushy eyebrows lifted. "Is it, Jedi Skywalker? Is it really? You mean you ve never violated someone's personal preference in order to help him? Or ignored some minor bureaucratic rule that stood between you and what needed to be done?"

 Luke felt his cheeks flush, thinking back to Lando's use of that illegal slicer code to get his X-wing repaired at the Sluis Van shipyards. "Yes, I've done that on occasion," he admitted. "But this is different, somehow. It feels I don't know. Like I'm taking more responsibility for these people's lives than I should."

 "I understand your concerns," C'baoth said, less severely this time. "But that is indeed the crux of the matter. It is precisely the acceptance and wielding of responsibility that sets a Jedi apart from all others in the galaxy." He sighed deeply. "You must never forget, Luke, that in the final analysis these people are primitives. Only with our guidance can they ever hope to achieve any real maturity."

 "I wouldn't call them primitive, Master C'baoth," Luke suggested hesitantly. "They have modern technology, a reasonably efficient system of government"

 "The trappings of civilization without the substance," C'baoth said with a contemptuous snort. Machines and societal constructs do not define a culture's maturity, Jedi Skywalker. Maturity is defined solely by the understanding and use of the Force."

 His eyes drifted away, as if peering into the past. "There was such a society once, Luke," he said softly. "A vast and shining example of the heights all could aspire to. For a thousand generations we stood tall among the lesser beings of the galaxy, guardians of justice and order. The creators of true civilization. The Senate could debate and pass laws; but it was the Jedi who turned those laws into reality."

 His mouth twisted. "And in return, the galaxy destroyed us."

 Luke frowned. "I thought it was just the Emperor and a few Dark Jedi who exterminated the Jedi."

 C'baoth smiled bitterly. "Do you truly believe that even the Emperor could have succeeded in such a task without the consent of the entire galaxy?" He shook his head. "No, Luke. They hated usall the lesser beings did. Hated us for our power, and or knowledge, and our wisdom. Hated us for our maturity." His smile vanished. "And that hatred still exists. Waiting only for the Jedi to reemerge to blaze up again."

 Luke shook his head slowly. It didn't really seem to fit with what little he knew about the destruction of the Jedi. But on the other hand, he hadn't lived through that era. C'baoth had. "Hard to believe," he murmured.

 "Believe it, Jedi Skywalker," C'baoth rumbled. His eyes caught Luke's, burning suddenly with a cold fire. "That's why we must stand together, you and I. Why we must never let down our guard before a universe that would destroy us. Do you understand?"

 "I think so," Luke said, rubbing at the corner of his eye. His mind felt so sluggish in the fatigue dragging at him. And yet, even as he tried to think about C'baoth's words, images flowed unbidden from his memory. Images of Master Yoda, gruff but unafraid, with no trace of bitterness or anger toward anyone at the destruction of his fellow Jedi. Images of Ben Kenobi in the Mos Eisley cantina, treated with a sort of aloof respect, but respect nonetheless, after he'd been forced to cut down those two troublemakers.

 And clearest of all, images of his encounter at the New Cov tapcafe. Of the Barabel, asking for the mediation of a stranger, and accepting without question even those parts of Luke's judgment that had gone against him. Of the rest of the crowd, watching with hope and expectation and relief that a Jedi was there to keep things from getting out of hand. "I haven't experienced any such hatred."

 C'baoth gazed at him from under bushy eyebrows. "You will," he said darkly. "As will your sister. And her children."

 Luke's chest tightened. "I can protect them."

 "Can you teach them, as well?" C'baoth countered. "Have you the wisdom and skill to bring them to full knowledge of the was of the Force?"

 "I think so, yes.

 C'baoth snorted. "If you think but do not know then you gamble with their lives," he bit out. "You risk their futures over a selfish whim."

 "It's not a whim, Luke insisted. "Together, Leia and I can do it."

 "If you try, you will risk losing them to the dark side," C'baoth said flatly. He sighed, his eyes drilling away from Luke as he looked around the room. "We can't take that chance, Luke," he said quietly. "There are so few of us as it is. The endless war for power still ragesthe galaxy is in turmoil. We who remain must stand together against those who would destroy everything." He turned his eyes suddenly back on Luke. "No; we can't risk being divided and destroyed again. You must bring your sister and her children to me."

 "I can't do that," Luke said. C'baoth's expression changed"Not now, at least," Luke amended hastily. "It wouldn't be safe for Leia to travel right now. The Imperials have been hunting her for months, and Jomark isn't all that far from the edge of their territory."

 "Do you doubt that I can protect her?"

 "Ino, I don'tdoubt you," Luke said, choosing his words carefully. "It's just that"

 He paused. C'baoth had gone abruptly stiff, his eyes gazing outward at nothing. "Master C'baoth?" he asked. "Are you all right?"

 There was no reply. Luke stepped to his side, reaching out with the Force and wondering uneasily if the other was ill. But as always the Jedi Master's mind was closed to him. "Come, Master C'baoth," he said, taking the other's arm. "I'll help you to your chambers."

 C'baoth blinked twice, and with what seemed to be an effort, brought his gaze back to Luke's face. He took a shuddering breath; and suddenly he was back to normal again. "You're tired, Luke," he said. "Leave me and return to your chambers for sleep."

 Lukewas tired, he had to admit. "Are you all right?"

 "I'm fine," C'baoth assured him, a strangely grim tone to his voice.

 "Because if you need my help"

 "I said leave me!" C'baoth snapped. "I am a Jedi Master. I need help from no one.

 Luke found himself two paces back from C'baoth without any recollection of having taken the steps. "I'm sorry, Master C'baoth," he said. "I didn't mean any disrespect.

 The other's face softened a bit. "I know you didn't," he said. He took another deep breath, exhaled it quietly. "Bring your sister to me, Jedi Skywalker. I will protect her from the Empire; and will teach her such power as you can't imagine."

 Far in the back of Luke's mind, a small warning bell went off. Something about those words or perhaps the way C'baoth had said them

 "Now return to your chambers," C'baoth ordered. Once again his eyes seemed to be drifting away toward nothing. "Sleep, and we will talk further in the morning."

 

 He stood before her, his face half hidden by the cowl of his robe, his yellow eyes piercingly bright as they gazed across the infinite distance between them. His lips moved, but his words were drowned out by the throaty hooting of alarms all around them, filling Mara with an urgency that was rapidly edging into panic. Between her and the Emperor two figures appeared: the dark, imposing image of Darth Vader, and the smaller blackclad figure of Luke Skywalker. They stood before the Emperor, facing each other, and ignited their lightsabers. The blades crossed, brilliant red-white against brilliant green-white, and they prepared for battle.

 And then, without warning, the blades disengaged and with twin roars of hatred audible even over the alarms, both turned and strode toward the Emperor.

 Mara heard herself cry out as she struggled to rush to her master's aid. But the distance was too great, her body too sluggish. She screamed a challenge, trying to at least distract them. But neither Vader nor Skywalker seemed to hear her. They moved outward to flank the Emperor  and as they lifted their lightsabers high, she saw that the Emperor was gazing at her.

 She looked back at him, wanting desperately to turn away from the coming disaster but unable to move. A thousand thoughts and emotions flooded in through that gaze, a glittering kaleidoscope of pain and fear and rage that spun far too fast for her to really absorb. The Emperor raised his hands, sending cascades of jagged blue-white lightning at his enemies. Both men staggered under the counterattack, and Mara watched with the sudden agonized hope that this time it might end differently. But no. Vader and Skywalker straightened; and with another roar of rage, they lifted their lightsabers high

 YOU WILL KILL LUKE SKYWALKER!

 And with a jerk that threw her against her restraints, Mara snapped out of the dream.

 For a minute she just sat there, gasping for breath and struggling against the fading vision of lightsabers poised to strike. The small cockpit of the Skipray pressed tightly around her, triggering a momentary surge of claustrophobia. The back and neck of her flight suit were wet with perspiration, clammy against her skin. From what seemed to be a great distance, a proximity alert was pinging.

 The dream again. The same dream that had followed her around the galaxy for five years now. The same situation; the same horrifying ending; the same final, desperate plea.

 But this time, things were going to be different. This time, she had the power to kill Luke Skywalker.

 She looked out at the mottling of hyperspace spinning around the Skipray's canopy, some last bit of her mind coming fully awake. No, that was wrong. She wasn't going to kill Skywalker at all. She was

 She was going to ask him for help.

 The sour taste of bile rose into her throat; with an effort, she forced it down.No argument , she told herself sternly. If she wanted to rescue Karrde, she was going to have to go through with it.

 Skywalker owed Karrde this much. Later, after he'd repaid the debt, there would be time enough to kill him.

 The proximity alert changed tone, indicating thirty seconds to go. Cupping the hyperdrive levers in her hand, Mara watched the indicator go to zero and gently pushed the levers back. Mottling became starlines became the black of space. Space, and the dark sphere of a planet directly ahead.

 She had arrived at Jomark.

 Mentally crossing her fingers, she tapped the comm, keying the code she'd programmed in during the trip. Luck was with her: here, at least, Thrawn's people were still using standard Imperial guidance transponders. The Skipray's displays flashed the location, an island forming the center of a ring-shaped lake just past the sunset line. She triggered the transponder once more to be sure, then keyed in the sublight drive and started down. Trying to ignore that last image of the Emperor's face

 The wailing of the ship's alarm jerked her awake. "What?" she barked aloud to the empty cockpit, sleep sticky eyes flicking across the displays for the source of the trouble. It wasn't hard to find: the Skipray had rolled half over onto its side, its control surfaces screaming with stress as the computer fought to keep her from spinning out of the sky. Inexplicably, she was already deep inside the lower atmosphere, well past the point where she should have switched over to repulsorlifts.

 Clenching her teeth, she made the switchover and then gave the scan map a quick look. She'd only been out of it for a minute or two, but at the speed the Skipray was doing even a few seconds of inattention could be fatal. She dug her knuckles hard into her eyes, fighting against the fatigue pulling at her and feeling sweat breaking out again on her forehead. Flying while half asleep, her old instructor had often warned her, was the quickest if messiest way to end your life. And if she had gone down there would have been no one to blame but herself.

 Or would there?

 She leveled the ship off confirmed that there were no mountains in her path, and keyed in the autopilot. The ysalamir and portable nutrient framework that Aves had given her were back near the aft hatchway, secured to the engine access panel. Unstrapping from her seat, Mara made her way back toward it

 It was as if someone had snapped on a light switch. One second she felt as if she had just finished a four-day battle; half a step later, a meter or so from the ysalamir, the fatigue abruptly vanished.

 She smiled grimly to herself. So her suspicion had been correct: Thrawn's mad Jedi Master didn't want any company. "Nice try"' she called into the air. Unfastening the ysalamir frame from the access panel, she lugged it back to the cockpit and wedged it beside her seat.

 The rim of mountains surrounding the lake was visible now on the electropulse scanner, and the infrared had picked up an inhabited structure on the far side. Probably where Skywalker and this mad Jedi Master were, she decided, a guess that was confirmed a moment later as the sensors picked up a small mass of spaceship-grade metal just outside the building. There were no weapons emplacements or defense shields anywhere that she could detect, either on the rim or on the island beneath her. Maybe C'baoth didn't think he needed anything so primitive as turbolasers to protect him.

 Maybe he was right. Hunching herself over the control board, hair-trigger alert for any danger, Mara headed in.

 She was nearly to the midpoint of the crater when the attack came, a sudden impact on the Skipray's underside that kicked the entire craft a few centimeters upward. The second impact came on the heels of the first, this one centered on the ventral fin and yawing the ship hard to starboard. The ship jolted a third time before Mara finally identified the weapon: not missiles or laser blasts, but small, fast-moving rocks, undetectable by most of the Skipray's sophisticated sensors.

 The fourth impact knocked out the repulsorlifts, sending the Skipray falling out of the sky.

 

 CHAPTER
21

 Mara swore under her breath, throwing the Skipray's control surfaces into glide mode and keying for a contour scan of the cliff face beneath the rim building. A landing up on the rim was out of the question now; putting down on the limited area up there without her repulsorlifts might be possible, but not with a Jedi Master fighting her the whole way. alternately, she could go for the dark island beneath her, which would give her more room to operate but leave her with the problem of getting back up to the rim. Ditto if she tried to find a big enough landing area somewhere else down the mountains.

 Or she could admit defeat, fire up the main drive and pull for space, and go after Karrde alone.

 Gritting her teeth, she studied the contour scan. The rock storm had stopped after the fourth hitthe Jedi Master, no doubt, waiting to see if she'd crash without further encouragement on his part. With a little luck, maybe she could convince him that she was done for without actually wrecking the ship in the process. If she could just find the proper formation in that cliff face

 There it was, perhaps a third of the way down: a roughly hemispherical concavity where erosion had eaten away a layer of softer rock from the harder material surrounding it. The ledge that had been left beneath the indentation was relatively flat, and the whole thing was large enough to hold the Skipray comfortably.

 Now all she had to do was get the ship there. Mentally crossing her fingers, she flipped the ship nose up and eased in the main sublight drive.

 The glare of the drive trail lit up the near side of the rim mountains, throwing them into a dancing mosaic of light and shadow. The Skipray jerked up and forward, stabilized a little as Mara brought the nose a bit farther back off vertical. It threatened to overbalance, eased back as she tapped the control surfaces, twitched almost too far in the other direction, then steadied. Balancing on the drive like this was an inherently unstable operation, and Mara could feel the sweat breaking out on her forehead as she fought to keep the suddenly unwieldy craft under control. If C'baoth suspected what she was trying, it wouldn't take much effort on his part to finish her off.

 Setting her teeth together, splitting her attention between the approach scope, the airspeed indicator, and the throttle, she brought the ship in.

 She nearly didn't make it. The Skipray was still ten meters short of the ledge when its drive trail hit the cliff face below it with enough heat to ignite the rock, and an instant later the ship was sheathed in brilliantly colored fire. Mara held her course, trying to ignore the warbling of the hull warning sirens as she strained to see through the flames between her and her target. There was no time to waste with second thoughtsif she hesitated even a few seconds, the drive could easily burn away too much of the ledge for her to safely put down. Five meters away now, and the temperature inside the cabin was beginning to rise. Then three, then one

 There was a horrible screech of metal on rock as the Skipray's ventral fin scraped against the edge of the ledge. Mara cut the drive and braced herself, and with a stomach-churning drop, the ship dropped a meter to land tailfirst on the ledge. For a second it almost seemed it would remain balanced there. Then, with ponderous grace, it toppled slowly forward and slammed down hard onto its landing skids.

 Wiping the sweat out of her eyes, Mara keyed for a status readout. The airs tilting maneuver had been taught to her as an absolute last-ditch alternative to crashing. Now, she knew why.

 But she'd been lucky. The landing skids and ventral fin were a mess, but the engines, hyperdrive, life-support, and hull integrity were still all right. Shutting the systems back to standby, she hoisted the ysalamir frame up onto her shoulders and headed aft.

 The main portside hatchway was unusable, opening as it did out over empty space. There was, however, a secondary hatch set behind the dorsal laser cannon turret. Getting up the access ladder and through it with the ysalamir on her back was something of a trick, but after a couple of false starts she made it. The metal of the upper hull was uncomfortably hot to her touch as she climbed out onto it, but the cold winds coming off the lake below were a welcome relief after the superheated air inside. She propped the hatchway open to help cool the ship and looked upward.

 And to her chagrin discovered that she'd miscalculated. Instead of being ten to fifteen meters beneath the top of the crater, as she'd estimated, she was in fact nearly fifty meters down. The vast scale of the crater, combined with the mad rush of the landing itself, had skewed her perception.

 "Nothing like a little exercise after a long trip," she muttered to herself, pulling the glow rod from her beltpack and playing it across her line of ascent. The climb wasn't going to be fun, especially with the top-heavy weight of the ysalamir frame, but it looked possible. Attaching the glow rod to the shoulder of her jumpsuit, she picked out her first set of handholds and started up.

 She'd made maybe two meters when, without warning, the rock in front of her suddenly blazed with light.

 The shock of it sent her sliding back down the cliff face to a bumpy landing atop the Skipray; but she landed in a crouch with her blaster ready in her hand. Squinting against the twin lights glaring down on her, she snapped off a quick shot that took out the leftmost of them. The other promptly shut off; and then, even as she tried to blink away the purple blobs obscuring her vision, she heard a faint but unmistakable sound.

 The warbling of an R2 droid.

 "Hey!" she called softly. "Youdroid. Are are you Skywalker's astromech unit? If you are you know who I am. We met on Myrkrremember?"

 The droid remembered, all ,right. But from the indignant tone of the reply, it wasn't a memory the R2 was especially fond of. "Yes, well, skip all that," she told it tartly. "Your master is in trouble. I came to warn him."

 Another electronic warble, this one fairly dripping with sarcasm. "It's true," Mara insisted. Her dazzled vision was starting to recover now, and she could make out the dark shape of the X-wing hovering on its repulsorlifts about five meters away, its two starboard laser cannons pointed directly at her face. "I need to talk to him right away," Mara went on. "Before that Jedi Master up there figures out I'm still alive and tries to rectify the situation."

 She'd expected more sarcasm, or even out-and-out approval for such a goal. But the droid didn't say anything. Perhaps it had witnessed the brief battle between the Skipray and C'baoth's flying boulders. "Yes, that was him trying to kill me," she confirmed. "Nice and quiet, so that your master wouldn't notice anything and ask awkward questions."

 The droid beeped what sounded like a question of its own. "I came here because I need Skywalker's help," Mara said, taking a guess as to the content. "Karrde's been captured by the Imperials, and I can't get him out by myself. Karrde, in case you've forgotten, was the one who helped your friends set up an ambush against those stormtroopers that got both of you off Myrkr. You owe him."

 The droid snorted. "All right, then," Mara snapped. "Don't do it for Karrde, and don't do it for me. Take me up there because otherwise your precious master won't know until it's too late that his new teacher, C'baoth, is working for the Empire."

 The droid thought it over. Then, slowly, the X-wing rotated to point its lasers away from her and sidled over to the damaged Skipray. Mara holstered her blaster and got ready, wondering how she was going to squeeze into the cockpit with the ysalamir framework strapped to her shoulders.

 She needn't have worried. Instead of maneuvering to give her access to the cockpit, the droid instead presented her with one of the landing skids.

 "You must be joking," Mara protested, eyeing the skid hovering at waist height in front of her and thinking about the long drop to the lake below. But it was clear that the droid was serious; and after a moment, she reluctantly climbed aboard. "Okay," she said when she was as secure as she could arrange. "Let's go. And watch out for flying rocks."

 The X-wing eased away and began moving upward. Mara braced herself, waiting for C'baoth to pick up the attack where he'd left off. But they reached the top without incident; and as the droid settled the X-wing safely to the ground, Mara saw the shadowy figure of a cloaked man standing silently beside the fence surrounding the house.

 "You must be C'baoth," Mara said to him as she slid off the landing skid and got a grip on her blaster. "You always greet your visitors this way?"

 For a moment the figure didn't speak. Mara took a step toward him, feeling an eerie sense of dv vu as she tried to peer into the hood at the face not quite visible there. The Emperor had looked much the same way that night when he'd first chosen her from her home  "I have no visitors except lackeys from Grand Admiral Thrawn," the figure said at last. "All others are, by definition, intruders."

 "What makes you think I'm not with the Empire?" Mara countered. "In case it escaped your notice, I was following the Imperial beacon on that island down there when you knocked me out of the sky."

 In the dim starlight she had the impression that C'baoth was smiling inside the hood. "And what precisely does that prove?" he asked. "Merely that others can play with the Grand Admiral's little toys."

 "And can others get hold of the Grand Admiral's ysalamiri, too?" she demanded, gesturing toward the frame on her back. "Enough of this. The Grand Admiral"

 "The Grand Admiral is your enemy," C'baoth snapped suddenly. "Don't insult me with childish denials, Mara Jade. I saw it all in your mind as you approached. Did you really believe you could take my Jedi away from me?"

 Mara swallowed, shivering from the cold night wind and the colder feeling within her. Thrawn had said that C'baoth was insane, and she could indeed hear the unstable edge of madness in his voice. But there was far more to the man than just that. There was a hard steel behind the voice, ruthless and calculating, with a sense of both supreme power and supreme confidence underlying it all.

 It was like hearing the Emperor speak again.

 "I need Skywalker's help," she said, forcing her own voice to remain calm. "All I need to do is borrow him for a little while."

 "And then you'll return him?" C'baoth said sardonically.

 Mara clenched her teeth. "I'll have his help, C'baoth. Whether you like it or not."

 There was no doubt this time that the Jedi Master had smiled. A thin, ghostly smile. "Oh, no, Mara Jade," he murmured. "You are mistaken. Do you truly believe that simply because you stand in the middle of an empty space in the Force that I am powerless against you?"

 "There's also this," Mara said, pulling her blaster from its holster and aiming it at his chest.

 C'baoth didn't move; but suddenly Mara could feel a surge of tension in the air around her. "No one points a weapon at me with impunity," the Jedi Master said with quiet menace. "You will pay dearly for this one day."

 "I'll take my chances," Mara said, retreating a step to put her back against the X-wing's soard S-foils. Above and to her left she could hear the R2 droid chirping thoughtfully to itself. "You want to stand aside and let me pass? Or do we do this the hard way?"

 C'baoth seemed to study her. "I could destroy you, you know," he said. The menace had vanished from his voice now, leaving something almost conversational in its place. "Right there where you stand, before you even knew the attack was coming. But I won't. Not now. I've felt your presence over the years, Mara Jade; the rising and falling of your power after the Emperor's death took most of your strength away. And now I've seen you in my meditations. Someday you will come to me, of your own free will."

 "I'll take my chances on that one, too, Mara said.

 "You don't believe me," C'baoth said with another of his ghostly smiles. "But you shall. The future is fixed, my young would-be Jedi, as is your destiny. Someday you will kneel before me. I have foreseen it."

 "I wouldn't trust Jedi foreseeing all that much if I were you," Mara retorted, risking a glance past him at the darkened building and wondering what C'baoth would do if she tried shouting Skywalker's name. "The Emperor did a lot of that, too. It didn't help him much in the end."

 "Perhaps I am wiser than the Emperor was," C'baoth said. His head turned slightly. "I told you to go to your chambers," he said in a louder voice.

 "Yes, you did," a familiar voice acknowledged; and from the shadows at the front of the house a new figure moved across the courtyard.

 Skywalker.

 "Then why are you here?" C'baoth asked.

 "I felt a disturbance in the Force," the younger man said as he passed through the gate and came more fully into the dim starlight. Above his black tunic his face was expressionless, his eyes fixed on Mara. "As if a battle were taking place nearby. Hello, Mara."

 "Skywalker," she managed between dry lips. With all that had happened to her since her arrival in the Jomark system, it was only now just dawning on her the enormity of the task she'd set for herself. She, who'd openly told Skywalker that she would someday kill him, was now going to have to convince him that she was more trustworthy than a Jedi Master. "LookSkywalker"

 "Aren't you aiming that at the wrong person?" he asked mildly. "I thought I was the one you were gunning for."

 Mara had almost forgotten the blaster she had pointed at C'baoth. "I didn't come here to kill you," she said. Even to her own ears the words sounded thin and deceitful. "Karrde's in trouble with the Empire. I need your help to get him out."

 "I see." Skywalker looked at C'baoth. "What happened here, Master C'baoth?"

 "What does it matter?" the other countered. "Despite her words just now, she did indeed come here to destroy you. Would you rather I had not stopped her?"

 "Skywalker" Mara began.

 He stopped her with an upraised hand, his eyes still on C'baoth. "Did she attack you?" he asked. "Or threaten you in any way?"

 Mara looked at C'baoth and felt the breath freeze in her lungs. The earlier confidence had vanished from the Jedi Master's face. In its place was something cold and deadly. Directed not at her, but at Skywalker.

 And suddenly Mara understood. Skywalker wouldn't need convincing of C'baoth's treachery after all. Somehow, he already knew.

 "What does it matter what her precise actions were?" C'baoth demanded, his voice colder even than his face. "What matters is that she is a living example of the danger I have been warning you of since your arrival. The danger all Jedi face from a galaxy that hates and fears us."

 "No, Master C'baoth," Skywalker said, his voice almost gentle. "Surely you must understand that the means are no less important than the ends. A Jedi uses the Force for knowledge and defense, never for attack."

 C'baoth snorted. "A platitude for the simpleminded. Or for those with insufficient wisdom to make their own decisions. I am beyond such things, Jedi Skywalker. As you will be someday.If you choose to remain.

 Skywalker shook his head. "I'm sorry," he said. "I can't." He turned away and walked toward Mara

 "Then you turn your back on the galaxy," C'baoth said, his voice now earnest and sincere. "Only with our guidance and strength can they ever hope to achieve real maturity. You know that as well as I do."

 Skywalker stopped. "But you just said they hate us," he pointed out. "How can we teach people who don't want our guidance?"

 "We can heal the galaxy, Luke," C'baoth said quietly. "Together, you and I can do it. Without us, there is no hope. None at all."

 "Maybe he can do it without you," Mara put in loudly, trying to break up the verbal spell C'baoth was weaving. She'd seen the same sort of thing work for the Emperor, and Skywalker's eyelids were heavy enough as it was.

 Too heavy, in fact. Like hers had been on the approach to Jomark 

 Stepping away from the X-wing, she walked over to Skywalker. C'baoth made a small movement, as if he were going to stop her; she hefted her blaster, and he seemed to abandon the idea.

 Even without looking at him, she could tell when the Force-empty zone around her ysalamir touched Skywalker. He inhaled sharply, shoulders straightening from a slump he probably hadn't even noticed they had, and nodded as if he finally understood a hitherto unexplained piece of a puzzle. "Is this how you would heal the galaxy, Master C'baoth?" he asked. "By coercion and deceit?"

 Abruptly, C'baoth threw back his head and laughed. It was about the last reaction Mara would have expected from him, and the sheer surprise of it momentarily froze her muscles.

 And in that split second, the Jedi Master struck.

 It was only a small rock, as rocks went, but it came in out of nowhere to strike her gun hand with paralyzing force. The blaster went spinning off into the darkness as her hand flared with pain and then went numb. "Watch out!" she snapped to Skywalker, dropping down into a crouch and scrabbling around for her weapon as a second stone whistled past her ear.

 There was asnap-hiss from beside her, and suddenly the terrain was bathed in the green-white glow of Skywalker's lightsaber. "Get behind the ship," he ordered her. "I'll hold him off."

 The memory of Myrkr flashed through Mara's mind; but even as she opened her mouth to remind him of how useless he was without the Force, he took a long step forward to put himself outside the ysalamir's influence. The lightsaber flashed sideways, and she heard the double crunch as its silent blade intercepted two more incoming rocks.

 Still laughing, C'baoth raised his hand and sent a flash of blue lightning toward them.

 Skywalker caught the bolt on his lightsaber, and for an instant the green of the blade was surrounded by a blue-white coronal discharge. A second bolt shot past him to vanish at the edge of the empty zone around Mara; a third again wrapped itself around the lightsaber blade.

 Mara's fumbling hand brushed something metallic: her blaster. Scooping it up, she swung it toward C'baoth

 And with a brilliant flash of laser fire, the whole scene seemed to blow up in front of her.

 She had forgotten about the droid sitting up there in the X-wing. Apparently, C'baoth had forgotten about it, too.

 "Skywalker?" she called, blinking at the purple haze floating in front of her eyes and wrinkling her nose at the tingling smell of ozone. "Where are you?"

 "Over here by C'baoth," Skywalker's voice said. "He's still alive."

 "We can fix that," Mara growled. Carefully picking her way across the steaming ruts the X-wing's laser cannon had gouged in the ground, she headed over.

 C'baoth was lying on his back, unconscious but breathing evenly, with Skywalker kneeling over him. "Not even singed," she murmured. "Impressive."

 "Artoo wasn't shooting to kill," Skywalker said, his fingertips moving gently across the old man's face. "It was probably the sonic shock that got him."

 "That, or getting knocked off his feet by the shock wave," Mara agreed, lining her blaster up on the still figure. "Get out of the way. I'll finish it."

 Skywalker looked up at her. "We're not going to kill him," he said. "Not like this."

 "Would you rather wait until he's conscious again and can fight back?" she retorted.

 "There's no need to kill him at all," Skywalker insisted. "We can be off Jomark long before he wakes up."

 "You don't leave an enemy at your back," she told him stiffly. "Not if you like living.

 "He doesn't have to be an enemy, Mara," Skywalker said with that irritating earnestness of his. "He's ill. Maybe he can be cured."

 Mara felt her lip twist. "You didn't hear the way he was talking before you showed up," she said. "He's insane, all right; but that's not all he is anymore. He's a lot stronger, and a whole lot more dangerous." She hesitated. "He sounded just like the Emperor and Vader used to."

 A muscle in Skywalker's cheek twitched. "Vader was deep in the dark side, too," he told her. "He was able to break that hold and come back. Maybe C'baoth can do the same.

 "I wouldn't bet on it," Mara said. But she holstered her blaster. They didn't have time to debate the issue; and as long as she needed Skywalker's help, he had effective veto on decisions like this. "Just remember, it's your back that'll get the knife if you're wrong."

 "I know." He looked down at C'baoth once more, then back up at her. "You said Karrde was in trouble."

 "Yes," Mara nodded, glad to change the subject.

 Skywalker's mention of the Emperor and Vader had reminded her all too clearly of that recurring dream. "The Grand Admiral's taken him. I need your help to get him out."

 She braced herself for the inevitable argument and bargaining; but to her surprise, he simply nodded and stood up. "Okay," he said. "Let's go."

 

 With one last mournful electronic wail Artoo signed off and with the usual flicker of pseudomotion, the X-wing was gone. "Well, he's not happy about it," Luke said, shutting down the Skipray's transmitter. "But I think I've persuaded him to go straight home."

 "You'd better be more than just thinking you've persuaded him," Mara warned from the pilot's chair, her eyes on the nav computer display. "Sneaking into an Imperial supply depot is going to be hard enough without a New Republic X-wing in tow.

 "Right," Luke said, throwing a sideways look at her and wondering if getting into the Skipray with her had been one of the smarter things he'd done lately. Mara had put the ysalamir away in the rear of the ship, and he could feel her hatred of him simmering beneath her consciousness like a half-burned fire. It evoked unpleasant memories of the Emperor, the man who'd been Mara's teacher and Luke briefly wondered if this could be some sort of overly elaborate trick to lure him to his death.

 But her hatred seemed to be under control, and there was no deceit in her that he could detect.

 But then, he hadn't seen C'baoth's deceit either, until it was almost too late.

 Luke shifted in his chair, his face warming with embarrassment at how easily he'd been taken in by C'baoth's act. But it hadn't all been an act, he reminded himself. The Jedi Master's emotional instabilities were genuinethat much he was convinced of. And even if those instabilities didn't extend as far as the insanity that Mara had alluded to, they certainly extended far enough for C'baoth to qualas ill.

 And if what she'd said about C'baoth working with the Empire was also true

 Luke shivered.I will teach her such power as you can't imagine, C'baoth had said about Leia. The words had been different from those Vader had spoken to Luke on Endor, but the dark sense behind them had been identical. Whatever C'baoth had once been, there was no doubt in Luke's mind that he was now moving along the path of the dark side.

 And yet, Luke had been able to help Vader win his way back from that same path. Was it conceit to think he could do the same for C'baoth?

 He shook the thought away. However C'baoth's destiny might yet be entwined with his, such encounters were too far in the future to begin planning for them. For now, he needed to concentrate on the immediate task at hand, and to leave the future to the guidance of the Force. "How did the Grand Admiral find Karrde?" he asked Mara.

 Her lips compressed momentarily, and Luke caught a flash of self-reproach. "They put a homing beacon aboard my ship," she said. "I led them right to his hideout."

 Luke nodded, thinking back to the rescue of Leia and that harrowing escape from the first Death Star aboard theFalcon . "They pulled that same trick on us, too," he said. "That's how they found the Yavin base."

 "Considering what it cost them, I don't think you've got any complaints coming," Mara said sarcastically.

 "I don't imagine the Emperor was pleased," Luke murmured.

 "No, he wasn't," Mara said, her voice dark with memories of her own. "Vader nearly died for that blunder." Deliberately, she looked over at Luke's hands. "That was when he lost his right hand, in fact."

 Luke flexed the fingers of his artificial right hand, feeling a ghostly echo of the searing pain that had lanced through it as Vader's lightsaber had sliced through skin and muscle and bone. A fragment of an old Tatooine aphortsm flickered through his mind: something about the passing of evil from one generation to the next "What's the plan?" he asked.

 Mara took a deep breath, and Luke could sense the emotional effort as she put the past aside. "Karrde's being held aboard the Grand Admiral's flagship, theChimaera ," she told him. "According to their flight schedule, they're going to be taking on supplies in the Wistril system four days from now. If we push it, we should be able to get there a few hours ahead of them. We'll ditch the Skipray, take charge of one of the supply shuttles, and just go on up with the rest of the flight pattern."

 Luke thought it over. It sounded tricky, but not ridiculously so. "What happens after we're aboard?"

 "Standard Imperial procedure is to keep all the shuttle crews locked aboard their ships while theChimaera 's crewers handle the unloading," Mara said. "Or at least that was standard procedure five years ago. Means we'll need some kind of diversion to get out of the shuttle."

 "Sounds risky," Luke shook his head. "We don't want to draw attention to ourselves."

 "You got any better ideas?"

 Luke shrugged. "Not yet," he said. "But we've got four days to think about it. We'll come up with something."

 

 CHAPTER
22

 Mara eased the repulsorlifts off; and with a faint metallic clank the cargo shuttle touched down on the main deck of theChimaera 's aft hangar bay. "Shuttle 37 down," Luke announced into the comm. "Awaiting further orders."

 "Shuttle 37, acknowledged," the voice of the controller came over the speaker. "Shut down all systems and prepare for unloading."

 "Got it."

 Luke reached over to shut off the comm, but Mara stopped him. "Control, this is my first cargo run," she said, her voice carrying just the right touch of idle curiosity. "About how long until we'll be able to leave?"

 "I suggest you make yourselves comfortable," Control said dryly. "We unload all the shuttles before any of you leave. Figure a couple of hours, at the least."

 "Oh," Mara said, sounding taken aback. "Well thanks. Maybe I'll take a nap."

 She signed off. "Good," she said, unstrapping and standing up. "That ought to give us enough time to get to the detention center and back."

 "Let's just hope they haven't transferred Karrde off the ship," Luke said, following her to the rear of the command deck and the spiral stairway leading down to the storage area below.

 "They haven't," Mara said, heading down the stairs. "The only danger is that they might have started the full treatment already."

 Luke frowned down at her. "The full treatment?"

 "Their interrogation." Mara reached the center of the storage room and looked appraisingly around. "All right. Just about there should do it." She pointed to a section of the deck in front of her. "Out of the way of prying eyes, and you shouldn't hit anything vital."

 "Right." Luke ignited his lightsaber, and began carefully cutting a hole in the floor. He was most of the way through when there was a brilliant spark from the hole and the lights in the storage room abruptly went out. "It's okay," Luke told Mara as she muttered something vicious under her breath. "The lightsaber gives off enough light to see by."

 "I'm more worried that the cable might have arced to the hangar deck," she countered. "They couldn't help but notice that."

 Luke paused, stretching out with Jedi senses. "Nobody nearby seems to have seen anything," he told Mara.

 "We'll hope." She gestured to the half-finished cut. "Get on with it."

 He did so. A minute later, with the help of a magnetic winch, they had hauled the severed section of decking and hull into the storage room. A few centimeters beneath it, lit eerily by the green light from Luke's lightsaber, was the hangar bay deck. Mara got the winch's grapple attached to it; stretching out flat on his stomach, Luke extended the lightsaber down through the hole. There he paused, waiting until he could sense that the corridor beneath the hangar deck was clear.

 "Don't forget to bevel it," Mara reminded him as the lightsaber bit smoothly into the hardened metal. "A gaping hole in the ceiling would be a little too obvious for even conscripts to miss."

 Luke nodded and finished the cut. Mara was ready, and even as he shut down the lightsaber she had the winch pulling the thick slab of metal up into the shuttle. She brought it perhaps a meter up and then shut down the motor. "That's far enough," she said. Blaster ready in her hand, she sat gingerly on the still-warm edge of the hole and dropped lightly down to the deck below. There was a second's pause as she looked around"All clear," she hissed.

 Luke sat down on the edge and looked over at the winch control. Reaching out with the Force, he triggered the switch and followed her down.

 The deck below was farther than it had looked, but his Jedi-enhanced muscles handled the impact without trouble. Recovering his balance, he looked up just as the metal plug settled neatly back down into the hole. "Looks pretty good," Mara murmured. "I don't think anyone will notice."

 "Not unless they look straight up," Luke agreed. "Which way to the detention center?"

 "There," Mara said, gesturing with her blaster to their left. "We're not going to get there dressed like this, though. Come on.

 She led the way to the end of the passage, then down a crossway to another, wider corridor. Luke kept his senses alert, but only occasionally did he detect anyone. "Awfully quiet down here."

 "It won't last," Mara said. "This is a service supply area, and most of the people who'd normally be working here are a level up helping unload the shuttles. But we need to get into some uniforms or flight suits or something before we go much farther."

 Luke thought back to the first time he'd tried masquerading as an imperial. "Okay, but let's try to avoid stormtrooper armor, he said. "Those helmets are hard to see through."

 "I didn't think Jedi needed to use their eyes," Mara countered sourly. "Watch ithere we are. That's a section of crew quarters over there."

 Luke had already sensed the sudden jump in population level. "I don't think we can sneak through that many people," he warned.

 "I wasn't planning to." Mara pointed to another corridor leading off to their right. "There should be a group of TIE pilot ready rooms down that way. Let's see if we can find an empty one that has a couple of spare flight suits lying around."

 But if the Empire was lax enough to leave its service supply areas unguarded, it wasn't so careless with its pilot ready rooms. There were six of them grouped around the turbolift cluster at the end of the corridor; and from the sounds of conversation faintly audible through the doors, it was clear that all six were occupied by at least two people. "What now?" Luke whispered to Mara.

 "What do you think?" she retorted, dropping her blaster back in its holster and flexing her fingers. "Just tell me which room has the fewest people in it and then get out of the way. I'll do the rest."

 "Wait a minute," Luke said, thinking hard. He didn't want to kill the men behind those doors in cold blood; but neither did he want to put himself into the dangerous situation he'd faced during the Imperial raid on Lando's Nkllon mining operation a few months earlier. There, he'd successfully used the Force to confuse the attacking TIE fighters, but at the cost of skating perilously close to the edge of the dark side. It wasn't an experience he wanted to repeat.

 But if he could just gently touch the Imperials' minds, instead of grabbing and twisting them

 "We'll try this one," he told Mara, nodding to a room in which he could sense only three men. But we're not going to charge in fighting. I think I can suppress their curiosity enough for me to walk in, take the flight suits, and leave.

 "What if you can't?" Mara demanded. "We'll have lost whatever surprise we would have had."

 "It'll work," Luke assured her. "Get ready."

 "Skywalker"

 "Besides which, I doubt that even with surprise you can take out all three without any noise," he added. "Can you?"

 She glared laser bolts, but gestured him to the door. Setting his mind firmly in line with the Force, he moved toward it. The heavy metal panel slid open at his approach, and he stepped in.

 There were indeed three men lounging around the monitor table in the center of the room: two in the Imperial brown of ordinary crewers, the other in the black uniform and flaring helmet of a Fleet trooper. All three looked up as the door opened, and Luke caught their idle interest in the newcomer. Reaching out through the Force, he gently touched their minds, shunting the curiosity away. The two crewers seemed to size him up and then ignore him; the trooper continued to watch, but only as a change from watching his companions. Trying to look as casual and unconcerned as he could, Luke went over to the rack of flight suits against the wall and selected three of them. The conversation around the monitor table continued as he draped them over his arm and walked back out of the room. The door slid shut behind him

 "Well?" Mara hissed.

 Luke nodded, exhaling quietly. "Go ahead and get into it," he told her. "I want to try and hold off their curiosity for another couple of minutes. Until they've forgotten I was ever in there."

 Mara nodded and started pulling the flight suit on over her jumpsuit. "Handy trick, I must say."

 "It worked this time, anyway," Luke agreed. Carefully, he eased back his touch on the Imperials' minds, waiting tensely for the surge of emotion that would show the whole scheme was unraveling. But there was nothing except the lazy flow of idle conversation.

 The trick had worked. This time, anyway.

 Mara had a turbolift car standing by as he turned away from the ready room. "Come on, come on," she beckoned impatiently. She was already in her flight suit, with the other two slung over her shoulder. "You can change on the way."

 "I hope no one comes aboard while I'm doing it," he muttered as he slipped into the car. "Be a little hard to explain."

 "No one's coming aboard," she said as the turbolift door closed behind him and the car started to move. "I've keyed it for nonstop. She eyed him. "You still want to do it this way?"

 "I don't think we've got any real choice," he said, getting into the flight suit. It felt uncomfortably tight over his regular outfit. "Han and I tried the frontal approach once, on the Death Star. It wasn't exactly an unqualified success.

 "Yes, but you didn't have access to the main computer then," Mara pointed out. "If I can fiddle the records and transfer orders, we ought to be able to get him out before anyone realizes they've been had."

 "But you'd still be leaving witnesses behind who knew he'd left," Luke reminded her. "If any of them decided to check on the order verbally, the whole thing would fall apart right there. And I don't think that suppression trick I used in the ready room will work on detention center guardsthey're bound to be too alert."

 "All right," Mara said, turning back to the turbolift control board. "It doesn't sound like much fun to me. But if that's what you want, I'm game."

 The detention center was in the far aft section of the ship, a few decks beneath the command and systems control sections and directly above Engineering and the huge sublight drive thrust nozzles. The turbolift car shifted direction several times along the way, alternating between horizontal and vertical movement, It seemed to Luke to be altogether too complicated a route, and he found himself wondering even now if Mara might be pulling some kind of double cross. But her sense didn't indicate any such treachery; and it occurred to him that she might have deliberately tangled their path to put theChimaera 's internal security systems off the scent.

 At last the car came to a halt, and the door slid open. They stepped out into a long corridor in which a handful of crewers in maintenance coveralls could be seen going about their business. "Your access door's that way," Mara murmured, nodding down the corridor. "I'll give you three minutes to get set."

 Luke nodded and set off striving to look like he belonged there. His footsteps echoed on the metal deck, bringing back memories of that near-disastrous visit to the first Death Star.

 But he'd been a wide-eyed kid then, dazzled by visions of glory and heroism and too naive to understand the deadly dangers that went with such things. Now, he was older and more seasoned, and knew exactly what it was he was walking into.

 And yet was walking into it anyway. Dimly, he wondered if that made him less reckless than he'd been the last time, or more so.

 He reached the door and paused beside it, pretending to study a data pad that had been in one of the flight suit's pockets until the corridor was deserted. Then, taking one last deep breath of clear air, he opened the door and stepped inside.

 Even holding his breath, the stench hit him like a slap in the face. Whatever advancements the Empire might have made in the past few years, their shipboard garbage pits still smelled as bad as ever.

 He let the door slide shut behind him, and as it did so he heard the faint sound of an internal relay closing. He'd cut things a little too close; Mara must already have activated the compression cycle. Breathing through his mouth, he waitedand a moment later, with a muffled clang of heavy hydraulics, the walls began moving slowly toward each other.

 Luke swallowed, gripping his lightsaber tightly as he tried to keep on top of the tangle of garbage and discarded equipment that was now starting to buck and twist around his feet. Getting into the detention level this way had been his idea, and he'd had to talk long and hard before Mara had been convinced. But now that he was actually here, and the walls were closing in on him, it suddenly didn't seem like nearly such a good idea anymore. If Mara couldn't adequately control the walls' movementor if she was interrupted at her task

 Or if she gave in for just a few seconds to her hatred for him 

 The walls came ever closer, grinding together everything in their path. Luke struggled to keep his footing, all too aware that if Mara was planning a betrayal he wouldn't know until it was too late to save himself. The compressor walls were too thick for him to cut a gap with his lightsaber, and already the shifting mass beneath his feet had taken him too far away from the door to escape that way. Listening to the creak of tortured metal and plastic, Luke watched as the gap between the walls closed to two metersthen one and a halfthen one

 And came to a shuddering halt just under a meter apart.

 Luke took a deep breath, almost not noticing the rancid smell. Mara hadn't betrayed him, and she'd handled her end of the scheme perfectly. Now it was his turn. Moving to the back end of the chamber, he gathered his feet beneath him and jumped.

 The footing was unstable, and the garbage compactor walls impressively tall, and even with Jedi enhancement behind the jump he made it only about halfway to the top. But even as he reached the top of his arc he drew his knees up and swung his feet out; and with a wrenching jolt to his legs and lower back, he wedged himself solidly between the walls. Taking a moment to catch his breath and get his bearings, he started up.

 It wasn't as bad as he'd feared it would be. He'd done a fair amount of climbing as a boy on Tatooine and had tackled rock chimneys at least half a dozen times, though never with any real enthusiasm. The smooth walls here in the compactor offered less traction than stone would have, but the evenness of the spacing and the absence of sharp rocks to dig into his back more than made up for it. Within a couple of minutes he had reached the top of the compactor's walls and the maintenance chute that would leadhe hopedto the detention level. If Mara's reading of the schedule had been right, he had about five minutes before the guard shift changed up there. Setting his teeth together, he forced his way through the magnetic screen at the bottom of the chute and, in clean air again, started up.

 He made it in just over five minutes, to discover that Mara's reading had indeed been right. Through the grating that covered the chute opening he could hear the sounds of conversation and movement coming from the direction of the control room, punctuated by the regular hiss of opening turbolift doors. The guard was changing; and for the next couple of minutes both shifts would be in the control room. An ideal time, if he was quick, to slip a prisoner out from under their noses.

 Hanging on to the grating by one hand, he got his lightsaber free and ignited it. Making sure not to let the tip of the blade show through into the corridor beyond, he sliced off a section of the grating and eased it into the shaft with him. He used a hook from his flight suit to hang the section to what was left of the grating, and climbed through the opening.

 The corridor was deserted. Luke glanced at the nearest cell number to orient himself and set off toward the one Mara had named. The conversation in the control room seemed to be winding down, and soon now the new shift of guards would be moving out to take up their positions in the block corridors. Senses alert, Luke slipped down the cross corridor to the indicated cell and, mentally crossing his fingers, punched the lock release.

 Talon Karrde looked up from the cot as the door slid open, that well-remembered sardonic half smile on his face. His eyes focused on the face above the flight suit, and abruptly the smile vanished. "I don't believe it," he murmured.

 "Me, either," Luke told him, throwing a quick glance around the room. "You fit to travel?"

 "Fit and ready," Karrde said, already up and moving toward the door. "Fortunately, they're still in the softening-up phase. Lack of food and sleepyou're familiar with the routine."

 "I've heard of it." Luke looked both ways down the corridor. Still no one. "Exit's this way. Come on."

 They made it to the grating without incident. "You must be joking, of course," Karrde said as Luke maneuvered his way into the hole and got his feet and back braced against the chute walls.

 "The other way out has guards at the end of it," Luke reminded him.

 "Point," Karrde conceded, reluctantly looking into the gap. "I suppose it'd be too much to hope for a rope."

 "Sorry. The only place to tie it is this grate, and they'd spot that in no time." Luke frowned at him. "You're not afraid of heights, are you?"

 "It's the falling from them that worries me," Kai'rde said dryly. But he was already climbing into the opening, though his hands were white-knuckled where he gripped the grating.

 "We're going to rock-chimney it down to the garbage masher," Luke told him. "You ever done that before?"

 "No, but I'm a quick study," Karrde said. Looking back over his shoulder at Luke, he eased into a similar position against the chute walls. "I presume you want this hole covered up," he added, pulling the grating section from its perch and filling it back into the opening. "Though it's not going to fool anyone who takes a close look at it."

 "With luck, we'll be back at the hangar bay before that happens," Luke assured him. "Come on, now. Slow and easy; let's go."

 They made it back to the garbage compactor without serious mishap. "The dark side of the Empire the tourists never see," Karrde commented dryly as Luke led him across the tangle of garbage. "How do we get out?"

 "The door's right there," Luke said, pointing down below the level of the mass they were walking on. "Mara's supposed to open the walls again in a couple of minutes and let us down.

 "Ah," Karrde said. "Mara's here, is she?"

 "She told me on the trip here how you were captured," Luke said, trying to read Karrde's sense. If he was angry at Mara, he was hiding it well. "She said she wasn't in on that trap."

 "Oh, I'm sure she wasn't," Karrde said. "If for no other reason than that my interrogators worked so hard to drop hints to the contrary." He looked thoughtfully at Luke. "What did she promise for your help in this?"

 Luke shook his head. "Nothing. She just reminded me that I owed you one for not turning me over to the Imperials back on Myrkr."

 A wry smile twitched Karrde's lip. "Indeed. No mention, either, of why the Grand Admiral wanted me in the first place?"

 Luke frowned at him. The other was watching him closely and now that he was paying attention, Luke could tell that Karrde was holding some secret back from him. "I assumed it was in revenge for helping me escape. Is there more to it than that?"

 Karrde's gaze drifted away from him. "Let's just say that if we make it away from here the New Republic stands to gain a great deal."

 His last word was cut off by a muffled clang; and with a ponderous jolt the compactor walls began slowly moving apart again. Luke helped Karrde maintain his balance as they waited for the door to be clear, stretching his senses outward into the corridor beyond. There were a fair number of crewers passing by, but he could sense no suspicion or special alertness in any of them. "Is Mara doing all this?" Karrde asked.

 Luke nodded. "She has an access code for the ship's computer."

 "Interesting," Karrde murmured. "I gathered from all this that she had some past connection with the Empire. Obviously, she was more highly placed than I realized."

 Luke nodded, thinking back to Mara's revelation to him back in the Myrkr forest. Mara Jade, the Emperor's Hand "Yes," he told Karrde soberly. "She was."

 The walls reached their limit and shut down. A moment later there was a click of a relay. Luke waited until the corridor immediately outside was deserted, then opened it and stepped out. A couple of maintenance techs working at an open panel a dozen meters down the corridor threw a look of idle curiosity at the newcomers; throwing an equally unconcerned glance back their way, Luke pulled the data pad from his pocket and pretended to make an entry. Karrde played off the cue, standing beside him and spouting a stream of helpful jargon as Luke filled out his imaginary report. Letting the door slide closed, Luke stuffed the data pad back into his pocket and led the way down the corridor.

 Mara was waiting at the turbolift cluster with the spare flight suit draped over her arm. "Car's on its way she murmured. For a second, as her eyes met Karrde's, her face seemed to tighten.

 "He knows you didn't betray him," Luke told her quietly.

 "I didn't ask," she growled. But Luke could sense some of her tension vanish. "Here," she added, thrusting the flight suit at Karrde. "A little camouflage."

 "Thank you," Karrde said. "Where are we going?"

 "We came in on a supply shuttle," Mara said. "We cut an exit hole in the lower hull, but we should have enough time to weld it airtight before they send us back to the surface."

 The turbolift car arrived as Karrde was adjusting the fasteners on his borrowed flight suit. Two men with a gleaming power core relay on a float table were there before them, taking up most of the room. "Where to?" one of the techs asked with the absent politeness of a man with more important things on his mind.

 "Pilot ready room 33-129-T," Mara told him, using the same tone.

 The tech entered the destination on the panel and the door slid shut; and Luke took his first really relaxed breath since Mara had put the Skipray down on Wistril five hours ago. Another ten or fifteen minutes and they'd be safely back in their shuttle.

 Against all odds, they'd done it.

 

 The midpoint report from the hangar bay came in, and Pellaeon paused in his monitoring of the bridge deflector control overhaul to take a quick look at it. Excellent; the unloading was running nearly eight minutes ahead of schedule. At this rate theChimaera would be able to make its rendezvous with theStormhawk in plenty of time for them to set up their ambush of the Rebel convoy assembling off Corfai. He marked the report as noted and sent it back into the files; and he had turned his attention back to the deflector overhaul when he heard a quiet footstep behind him.

 "Good evening, Captain," Thrawn nodded, coming up beside Pellaeon's chair and giving the bridge a leisurely scan.

 "Admiral," Pellaeon nodded back, swiveling to face him. "I thought you'd retired for the night, sir.

 "I've been in my command room," Thrawn said, looking past Pellaeon at the displays. "I thought I'd make one last survey of ship's status before I went to my quarters. Is that the bridge deflector overhaul?"

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, wondering which species' artwork had been favored with the Grand Admiral's scrutiny tonight. "No problems so far. The cargo unloading down in Aft Bay Two is running ahead of schedule, too."

 "Good," the Grand Admiral said. "Anything further from the patrol at Endor?"

 "Just an addendum to that one report, sir," Pellaeon told him. "Apparently, they've confirmed that the ship they caught coming into the system was in fact just a smuggler planning to sift again through the remains of the Imperial base there. They're continuing to back-check the crew."

 "Remind them to make a thorough job of it before they let the ship go," Thrawn said grimly. "Organa Solo won't have simply abandoned theMillennium Falcon in orbit there. Sooner or later she'll return for itand when she does, I intend to have her."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon nodded. The commander of the Endor patrol group, he was certain, didn't need any reminding of that. "Speaking of theMillennium Falcon , have you decided yet whether or not to do any further scan work on it?"

 Thrawn shook his head. "I doubt that would gain us anything. The scanning team would be better employed assisting with maintenance on theChimaera 's own systems. Have theMillennium Falcon transferred up to vehicle deep storage until we can find some use for it."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, swiveling back and logging the order. "Oh, and there was one other strange report that came in a few minutes ago. A routine patrol on the supply base perimeter came across a Skipray blastboat that had made a crash landing out there."

 "A crash landing?" Thrawn frowned.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, calling up the report. "Its underside was in pretty bad shape, and the whole hull was scorched."

 The picture came up on Pellaeon's display, and Thrawn leaned over his shoulder for a closer look. "Any bodies?"

 "No, sir," Pellaeon said. "The only thing aboardand this is the strange partwas an ysalamir."

 He felt Thrawn stiffen. "Show me."

 Pellaeon keyed for the next picture, a close-up of the ysalamir on its biosupport frame. "The frame isn't one of our designs," he pointed out. "No telling where it came from."

 "Oh, there's telling, all right," Thrawn assured him. He straightened up and took a deep breath. "Sound intruder alert, Captain. We have visitors aboard."

 Pellaeon stared up at him in astonishment, fumbling fingers locating and twisting the alert key. "Visitors?" he asked as the alarms began their throaty wailing.

 "Yes," Thrawn said, his glowing red eyes glittering with a sudden fire. "Order an immediate check of Karrde's cell. If he's still there, he's to be moved immediately and put under direct stormtrooper guard. I want another guard ring put around the supply shuttles and an immediate ID check begun of their crews. And then"he paused"have theChimaera 's main computer shut down."

 Pellaeon's fingers froze on his keyboard. "Shutdown ?"

 "Carry out your orders, Captain," Thrawn cut him off.

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said between suddenly stiff lips. In all his years of Imperial service he had never seen a warship's main computer deliberately shut down except in space dock. To do so was to blind and cripple the craft. With intruders aboard, perhaps fatally.

 "It will hamper our efforts a bit, I agree," Thrawn said, as if reading Pellaeon's fears. "But it will hamper our enemies' far more. You see, the only way for them to have known theChimaera 's course and destination was for Mara Jade to have tapped into the computer when we brought her and Karrde aboard."

 "That's impossible," Pellaeon insisted, wincing as his computer-driven displays began to wink out. "Any access codes she might have known were changed years ago.

 "Unless there are codes permanently hard-wired into the system," Thrawn said. "Set there by the Emperor for his use and that of his agents. Jade no doubt is counting on that access in her rescue attempt; therefore, we deprive her of it."

 A stormtrooper stepped up to them. "Yes, Commander?" Thrawn said.

 "Comlink message from detention," the electronically filtered voice announced. "The prisoner Talon Karrde is no longer in his cell."

 "Very well," the Grand Admiral said darkly. "Alert all units to begin a search of the area between detention and the aft hangar bays. Karrde is to be recaptured alivenot necessarily undamaged, but alive. As to his would-be rescuers, I want them also alive if possible. If not" He paused. "If not, I'll understand."

 

 CHAPTER
23

 The wail of the alarm sounded over the overhead speaker; and a few seconds later the turbolift car came to an abrupt halt. "Blast," one of the two gunners who had replaced the service techs in the car muttered, digging a small ID card from the slot behind his belt buckle. "Don't they ever get tired of running drills up there on the bridge?"

 "Talk like that might get you a face-to-face with a stormtrooper squad," the second warned, throwing a sideways glance at Luke and the others. Stepping past the first gunner, he slid his ID card into a slot on the control board and tapped in a confirmation code. "It was a lot worse before the Grand Admiral took over. Anyway, what do you want `em to do, announce snap drills in advance?"

 "The whole thing's burnin' useless, if you ask me," the first growled, clearing his ID the same way. "Who they expect's gonna come aboard, anyway? Some burnin' pirate gang or something?"

 Luke glanced questioningly at Karrde, wondering what they should do. But Mara was already moving toward the two gunners, the ID from her borrowed flight suit in hand. She stepped between them, reached the ID toward the slot

 And whipped the edge of her hand hard into the side of the first gunner's neck.

 The man's head snapped sideways and he toppled to the floor without a sound. The second gunner had just enough time to gurgle something unintelligible before Mara sent him to join his friend.

 "Come on, let's get out of here," she snapped, feeling along the line where the door fitted into the car's cylindrical wall. "Locked solid. Come on, Skywalker, get busy here."

 Luke ignited his lightsaber. "How much time have we got?" he asked as he carved a narrow exit through part of the door.

 "Not much," Mara said grimly. "Turbolift cars have sensors that keep track of the number of people inside. It'll give us maybe another minute to do our ID checks before reporting us to the system computer. I need to get to a terminal before the flag transfers from there to the main computer and brings the storm troopers down on top of us."

 Luke finished the cut and closed down the lightsaber as Mara and Karrde lifted the section down and out of the way. Beyond was the tunnel wall, not quite in line with the hole. "Good," Mara said, easing through the gap. "We were starting to rotate when the system froze down. There's room here to get into the tunnel."

 The others followed. The turbolift tunnel was roughly rectangular in cross-section, with gleaming guide rails along the walls, ceiling, and floor. Luke could feel the tingle of electric fields as he passed close beside the rails, and he made a mental note not to touch them. "Where are we going?" he whispered down the tunnel toward Mara.

 "Right here," she whispered back, stopping at a red rimmed plate set in the wall between the guide rails. "Access tunnelshould lead back to a service droid storage room and computer terminal."

 The lightsaber made quick work of the access panel's safety interlock. Mara darted through the opening, blaster in hand, and disappeared down the dark tunnel beyond. Luke and Karrde followed past a double row of deactivated maintenance droids, each with a bewildering array of tools fanned out from their limbs as if for inspection. Beyond the droids the tunnel widened into a small room where, as predicted, a terminal sat nestled amid the tubes and cables. Mara was already hunched over it; but as Luke stepped into the room he caught the sudden shock in her sense. "What's the matter?" he asked.

 "They've shut down the main computer," she said, a stunned expression on her face. "Not just bypassed or put it on standby. Shut it down."

 "The Grand Admiral must have figured out you can get into it," Karrde said, coming up behind Luke. "We'd better get moving. Do you have any idea where we are?"

 "I think we're somewhere above the aft hangar bays," Mara said. "Those service techs got off just forward of the central crew section, and we hadn't gone very far down yet."

 "Above the hangar bays," Karrde repeated thoughtfully. "Near the vehicle deep storage area, in other words?"

 Mara frowned at him. "Are you suggesting we grab a ship from up there?"

 "Why not?" Karrde countered. "They'll probably be expecting us to go directly to one of the hangar bays. They might not be watching for us to come in via vehicle lift from deep storage."

 "And if they are, it'll leave us trapped like clipped mynocks when the stormtroopers come to get us," Mara retorted. "Trying to shoot our way out of deep storage"

 "Hold it," Luke cut her off, Jedi combat senses tingling a warning. "Someone's coming."

 Mara muttered a curse and dropped down behind the computer terminal, blaster trained on the door. Karrde, still weaponless, faded back into the partial cover of the service tunnel and the maintenance droids lined up there. Luke flattened himself against the wall beside the door, lightsaber held ready but not ignited. He let the Force flow through him as he poised for action, listening to the dark, purposeful senses of the troopers coming up to the door and recognizing to his regret that no subtle mind touches would accomplish anything here. Gripping his lightsaber tightly, he waited

 Abruptly, with only a flicker of warning, the door slid open and two stormtroopers were in the room, blaster rifles at the ready. Luke raised his lightsaber, thumb on the activation switch

 And from the tunnel where Karrde had disappeared a floodlight suddenly winked on, accompanied by the sound of metal grinding against metal.

 The stormtroopers took a long step into the room, angling to opposite sides of the door, their blaster rifles swinging reflexively toward the light and sound as two black-clad naval troopers crowded into the room behind them. The stormtroopers spotted Mara crouching beside the terminal, and the blaster rifles changed direction to track back toward her.

 Mara was faster. Her blaster spat four times, two shots per stormtrooper, and both Imperials dropped to the floor, one with blaster still firing uselessly in death reflex. The naval troopers behind them dived for cover, firing wildly toward their attacker.

 A single sweep of the lightsaber caught them both.

 Luke closed down the weapon and ducked his head out the doorway for a quick look around. "All clear," he told Mara, coming back in.

 "For now, anyway," she countered, holstering her blaster and picking up two of the blaster rifles. "Come on.""

 Karrde was waiting for them at the access panel they'd come in by. "Doesn't sound like the turbolifts have been reactivated yet," he said. "It should be safe to move through the tunnels a while longer. Any trouble with the search party?"

 "No," Mara said, handing him one of the blaster rifles. "Effective diversion, by the way."

 "Thank you," Karrde said. "Maintenance droids are such useful things to have around. Deep storage?"

 "Deep storage," Mara agreed heavily. "You just better be right about this."

 "My apologies in advance if I'm not. Let's go."

 

 Slowly, by comlink and intercom, the reports began to come in. They weren't encouraging.

 "No sign of them anywhere in the detention level area," a stormtrooper commander reported to Pellaeon with the distracted air of someone trying to hold one conversation while listening to another. "One of the waste chute gratings in detention has been found cut openthat must be how they got Karrde out."

 "Never mind how they got him out," Pellaeon growled. "The recriminations can wait until later. The important thing right now is to find them."

 "The security teams are searching the area of that turbolift alert," the other said, his tone implying that anything a stormtrooper commander said must by, definition be important. "So far there's been no contact."

 Thrawn turned from the two communications officers who had been relaying messages for him to and from the hangar bays. "How was the waste chute grating cut open?" he asked.

 "I have no information on that," the commander said.

 "Get it," Thrawn said, his tone icy. "Also inform your search parties that two maintenance techs have reported seeing a man in a TIE fighter flight suit in the vicinity of that waste collector. Warn your guards in the aft hangar bays, as well."

 "Yes, sir," the commander said.

 Pellaeon looked at Thrawn. "I don't see how it matters right now how they got Karrde out, sir," he said. "Wouldn't our resources be better spent in finding them?"

 "Are you suggesting that we send all our soldiers and stormtroopers converging on the hangar bays?" Thrawn asked mildly. "That we thereby assume our quarry won't seek to cause damage elsewhere before attempting their escape?"

 "No, sir," Pellaeon said, feeling his face warming. "I realize we need to protect the entire ship. It just seems to me to be a low-priority line of inquiry.

 "Indulge me, Captain," Thrawn said quietly. "It's only a hunch, but

 "Admiral," the stormtrooper commander interrupted. "Report from search team 207, on deck 98 nexus 326-KK." Pellaeon's fingers automatically started for his keyboard; came up short as he remembered that there was no computer mapping available to pinpoint the location for him. "They've found team 102, all dead," the commander continued. "Two were killed by blaster fire; the other two" He hesitated. "There seems to be some confusion about the other two."

 "No confusion, Commander," Thrawn put in, his voice suddenly deadly. "Instruct them to look for near microscopic cuts across the bodies with partial cauterization."

 Pellaeon stared at him. There was a cold fire in the Grand Admiral's eyes that hadn't been there before. "Partial cauterization?" he repeated stupidly.

 "And then inform them," Thrawn continued, "that one of the intruders is the Jedi Luke Skywalker."

 Pellaeon felt his mouth drop open. "Skywalker?" he gasped. "That's impossible. He's on Jomark with C'baoth."

 "Was, Captain," Thrawn corrected icily. "He's here now." He took a deep, controlled breath; and as he let it out, the momentary anger seemed to fade away. "Obviously, our vaunted Jedi Master failed to keep him there, as he claimed he'd be able to. And I'd say that we now have our proof that Skywalker's escape from Myrkr wasn't a spur-of-the-moment decision."

 "You think Karrde and the Rebellion have been working together all along?" Pellaeon asked.

 "We'll find out soon enough," Thrawn told him, turning to look over his shoulder. "Rukh?"

 The silent gray figure moved to Thrawn's side. "Yes, my lord?

 "Get a squad of noncombat personnel together," Thrawn ordered. "Have them collect all the ysalamiri from Engineering and Systems Control and move them down to the hangar bays. There aren't nearly enough to cover the whole area, so use your hunter's instincts on their placement. The more we can hamper Skywalker's Jedi tricks, the less trouble we'll have taking him."

 The Noghri nodded and headed for the bridge exit. "We could also use the ysalamiri from the bridge" Pellaeon began.

 "Quiet a moment, Captain," Thrawn cut him off, his glowing eyes gazing unseeing through the side viewport and the edge of the planet turning beneath them. "I need to think. Yes. They'll try to travel in concealment whenever possible, I think. For now, that means the turbolift tunnels." He gestured to the two communications officers still standing beside his chair. "Order turbolift control to put the system back into normal service except for the 326-KK nexus between deck 98 and the aft hangar bays," he instructed them. "All cars in that area are to be moved to the nearest cluster point and remain locked there until further notice."

 One of the officers nodded and began relaying the order into his comlink. "You trying to herd them toward the hangar bays?" Pellaeon hazarded.

 "I'm trying to herd them in from a specific direction, yes," Thrawn nodded. His forehead was creased with thought, his eyes still gazing at nothing in particular. "The question is what they'll do once they realize that. Presumably try to break out of the nexus; but in which direction?"

 "I doubt they'll be foolish enough to return to the supply ship," Pellaeon suggested. "My guess is that they'll bypass the aft hangar bays entirely and try for one of the assault shuttles in the forward bays."

 "Perhaps," Thrawn agreed slowly. "If Skywalker is directing the escape, I'd say that was likely. But if Karrde is giving the orders " He fell silent, again deep in thought.

 It was somewhere to start, anyway. "Have extra guards placed around the assault shuttles," Pellaeon ordered the stormtrooper commander. "Better put some men inside the ships, too, in case the intruders make it that far."

 "No, they won't make for the shuttles if Karrde's in command," Thrawn murmured. "He's more apt to try something less obvious. Perhaps TIE fighters; or perhaps he'll return to the supply shuttles after all, assuming we won't expect that. Or else"

 Abruptly, his head snapped around to look at Pellaeon. "TheMillennium Falcon ," he demanded. "Where is it?"

 "Ah" Again, Pellaeon's hand reached uselessly for his command board. "I ordered it sent to deep storage, sir. I don't know whether or not the order's been carried out."

 Thrawn jabbed a finger at the stormtrooper commander. "Youget someone on the hangar bay computer and find that ship. Then get a squad there."

 The Grand Admiral looked at Pellaeon and for the first time since ordering the intruder alert, he smiled. "We have them, Captain."

 

 Karrde pulled away the section of cable duct that Luke had cut and carefully looked through the opening. "No one seems to be around," he murmured over his shoulder, his voice almost inaudible over the background rumble of machinery coming through from the room beyond. "I think we've beaten them here."

 "If they're coming at all," Luke said.

 "They're coming," Mara growled. "Bet on it. If there was one thing Thrawn had over all the other Grand Admirals, it was a knack for predicting his enemies' strategy."

 "There are a half dozen ships out there," Karrde continued. "Unmarked Intelligence ships, from the look of them. Any would probably do."

 "Any idea where we are?" Luke asked, trying to see past him through the cable duct. There was a fair amount of empty space out there surrounding the ships, plus a gaping light-rimmed opening in the deck that was presumably the shaft of a heavy vehicle lift. Unlike the one he remembered from the Death Star's hangar bay, though, this shaft had a corresponding hole in the ceiling above it to allow ships to be moved farther up toward the Star Destroyer's core.

 "We're near the bottom of the deep storage section, I think," Karrde told him. "A deck or two above the aft hangar bays. The chief difficulty will be if the lift itself is a deck down, blocking us from access to the bay and entry port."

 "Well, let's get in there and find out," Mara said, fingering her blaster rifle restlessly. "Waiting here won't gain us anything."

 "Agreed." Karrde cocked his head to the side. "I think I hear the lift coming now. They're slow, though, and there's enough cover by the ships. Skywalker?"

 Luke ignited his lightsaber again and quickly cut them a hole large enough to get through. Karrde went first, followed by Luke, with Mara bringing up the rear. "The hangar bay computer link is over there," Mara said, pointing to a freestanding console to their right as they crouched beside a battered-looking light freighter. "As soon as the lift passes I'll see if I can get us into it."

 "All right, but don't take too long at it," Karrde warned. "A faked transfer order won't gain us enough surprise to be worth any further delay."

 The top of a ship was becoming visible now as it was lifted from the hangar bays below. A ship that seemed remarkably familiar

 Luke felt his mouth drop open in surprise. "That'sno. No, it can't be."

 "It is," Mara said. "I'd forgottenthe Grand Admiral mentioned they were taking it aboard when I talked to him at Endor."

 Luke stared, a cold lump forming in his throat as theMillennium Falcon rose steadily up through the opening. Leia and Chewbacca had been aboard that ship "Did he say anything about prisoners?"

 "Not to me," Mara said. "I got the impression he'd found the ship deserted."

 Which meant that wherever Leia and Chewbacca had gone, they were now stranded there. But there was no time to worry about that now. "We're taking it back," he told the others, stuffing his lightsaber into his flight suit tunic. "Cover me."

 "Skywalker" Mara hissed; but Luke was already jogging toward the shaft. The lift plate itself came into view, revealing two men riding alongside theFalcon : a naval trooper and a tech with what looked like a combined data pad/control unit. They caught sight of Luke

 "Hey!" Luke called, waving as he hurried toward them. "Hold on!"

 The tech did something with his data pad and the lift stopped, and Luke could sense the sudden suspicion in the trooper's mind. "Got new orders on that one," he said as he trotted up to them. "The Grand Admiral wants it moved back down. Something about using it as bait."

 The tech frowned down at his data pad. He was young, Luke saw, probably not out of his teens. "There's nothing about new orders here," he objected.

 "I haven't heard anything about it, either," the trooper growled, drawing his blaster and pointing it vaguely in Luke's direction as he threw a quick look around the storage room.

 "It just came through a minute ago," Luke said, nodding back toward the computer console. "Stuffs not transferring very fast today, for some reason."

 "Makes a good story, anyway," the trooper retorted. His blaster was now very definitely pointed at Luke. "Let's see some ID, huh?"

 Luke shrugged; and, reaching out through the Force, he yanked the blaster out of the trooper's hand.

 The man didn't even pause to gape at the unexpected loss of his weapon. He threw himself forward, hands stretching toward Luke's neck 

 The blaster, heading straight toward Luke, suddenly reversed direction. The trooper caught the butt end full in the stomach, coughed once in strangled agony, and fell unmoving to the deck.

 "I'll take that," Luke told the tech, waving Karrde and Mara to join him. The tech, his face a rather motley gray, handed the data pad to him without a word.

 "Good job," Karrde said as he came up beside Luke. "Relax, we're not going to hurt you," he added to the tech, squatting down and relieving the gasping trooper of his comlink. "Not if you behave, anyway. Take your friend to that electrical closet over there and lock yourselves in."

 The tech glanced at him, looked again at Luke, and gave a quick nod. Hoisting the trooper under the armpits, he dragged him off. "Make sure they get settled all right, and then join me in the ship," Karrde told Luke. "I'm going to get the preflight started. Are there any security codes I need to know about?"

 "I don't think so." Luke glanced around the room, spotted Mara already busy with the computer console. "TheFalcon 's hard enough to keep functional as it is."

 "All right. Remind Mara not to waste too much time fiddling with that computer."

 He ducked under the ship and disappeared up the ramp. Luke waited until the tech had locked himself and the trooper into the electrical closet as ordered, and then followed.

 "It has a remarkably fast start-up sequence," Karrde remarked as Luke joined him in the cockpit. "Two minutes, maybe three, and we'll be ready to fly. You still have that controller?"

 "Right here," Luke said, handing it to him. "I'll go get Mara." He glanced out the cockpit window

 Just as a wide door across the room slid open, to reveal a full squad of stormtroopers.

 "Uh-oh," Karrde murmured as the eight white-armored Imperials marched purposefully toward theFalcon . "Do they know we're here?"

 Luke stretched out his senses, trying to gauge the stormtroopers' mental state. "I don't think so," he murmured back. "They seem to be thinking more like guards than soldiers."

 "Probably too noisy in here for them to hear the engines in start-up mode," Karrde said, ducking down in his seat out of their direct view. "Mara was right about the Grand Admiral; but we seem to be a step ahead of him."

 A sudden thought struck hike, and he threw a look through the side of the canopy. Mara was crouching beside the computer console, temporarily hidden from the stormtroopers view.

 But she wouldn't remain concealed for long and knowing Mara, she wouldn't just sit and wait for the Imperials to notice her. If there were only some way he could warn her not to fire on them yet

 Perhaps there was.Mara, he sent silently, trying to picture her in his mind.Wait until I give the word before you attack.

 There was no reply?; but he saw her throw a quick look at theFalcon in response and ease farther back into her limited cover. "I'm going back to the hatchway," he told Karrde. "I'll try to catch them in a cross fire with Mara. Stay out of sight up here."

 "Right."

 Keeping down, Luke hurried back down the short cockpit corridor. Barely in time; even as he came to the hatchway he could feel the vibration of battle-armored boots on the entry ramp. Four of them were coming in, he could sense, with the other four fanning out beneath the ship to watch the approaches. Another second and they would see hima second after that and someone would notice MaraMara; now.

 There was a flash of blaster fire from Mara's position, coming quickly enough on the tail of his command that Luke got the distinct impression Mara had planned to attack at that time whether she'd had his permission or not. Ignighting his lightsaber, Luke leaped around the corner onto the ramp, catching the stormtroopers just as they were starting to turn toward the threat behind them. His first sweep took off the barrel of the lead stormtrooper's blaster rifle; reaching out with the Force, he gave the man a hard shove, pushing him into his companions and sending the whole bunch of them tumbling helplessly down to the lift plate. Jumping off the ramp to the side, he deflected a shot from another stormtrooper and sliced the lightsaber blade across him; caught a half dozen more shots before Mara's blaster fire took the next one out. A quick look showed that she'd already dealt with the other two.

 A surge in the Force spun him around, to find that the group he'd sent rolling to the bottom of the ramp had untangled themselves. With a shout he charged them, lightsaber swinging in large circles as he waited for Mara to take advantage of his distraction to fire on them. But she didn't; and with the blaster bolts beginning to flash in at him there weren't many alternatives left. The lightsaber slashed four times and it was over.

 Breathing hard, he closed down the lightsaber and with a shock discovered why Mara hadn't been firing there at the end. The lift carrying theFalcon was dropping steadily down toward the deck below, well past the point where the stormtroopers would be out of Mara's line of fire. "Mara!" he called, looking up.

 "Yeah, what?" she shouted back, coming into view at the rim of the lift, already five meters above him. "What's Karrde doing?"

 "I guess we're leaving," Luke said. "JumpI'll catch you.

 An expression of annoyance flickered across Mara's face; but theFalcon was receding fast and she obeyed without hesitation. Reaching out with the Force, Luke caught her in an invisible grip, slowing her descent and landing her on theFalcon 's ramp. She hit the ramp running, and was inside in three steps.

 She was seated beside Karrde in the cockpit by the time Luke got the hatchway sealed and made it up there himself. "Better strap in," she called over her shoulder.

 Luke sat down behind her, suppressing the urge to order her out of the copilot's seat. He knew theFalcon far better than either she or Karrde did, but both of them probably had had more experience flying this general class of ship.

 And from the looks of things, there was some tricky flying coming up. Through the cockpit canopy Luke could see that they were coming down, not into a hangar bay as he'd hoped, but into a wide vehicle corridor equipped with what looked like some kind of repulsorlift pads set across the deck. "What happened with the computer?" he asked Mara.

 "I couldn't get in," Mara said. "Though it wouldn't have mattered if I had. That stormtrooper squad had plenty of time to call for help. Unless you thought to jam their comlinks," she added, looking at Karrde.

 "Come now, Mara," Karrde chided. "Of course I jammed their comlinks. Unfortunately, since they probably had orders to report once they were in position, we still won't have more than a few minutes. If that much."

 "Is that our way out?" Luke frowned, looking along the corridor. "I thought we'd be taking the lift straight down to the hangar bays."

 "This lift doesn't seem to go all the way down," Karrde said. "Offset from the hangar bay shaft, apparently. That lighted hole in the corridor deck ahead is probably it."

 "What then?" Luke asked.

 "We'll see if this control can operate that lift," Karrde said, holding up the data pad he'd taken from the tech. "I doubt it, though. If only for security they'll probably have"

 "Look!" Mara snapped, pointing down the corridor. Far ahead down the corridor was another lift plate, moving down toward the lighted opening Karrde had pointed out a moment earlier. If that was indeed the exit to the hangar baysand if the lift plate stopped there, blocking their way

 Karrde had apparently had the same thought. Abruptly, Luke was slammed hard into his seat as theFalcon leaped forward, clearing the edge of their lift plate and shooting down the corridor like a scalded tauntaun. For a moment it yawed wildly back and forth, swinging perilously near the corridor walls as the ship's repulsorlifts strobed with those built into the deck. Clenching his teeth, Luke watched as the lift plate ahead steadily closed the gap, the same bitter taste of near-helplessness in his mouth that he remembered from the Rancor pit beneath Jabba the Hutt's throne room. The Force was with him here, as it had been there, but at the moment he couldn't think of a way to harness that power. TheFalcon shot toward the descending platehe braced himself for the seemingly inevitable collision

 And abruptly, with a short screech of metal against metal, they were through the gap. TheFalcon rolled over once as it dropped through to the huge room below, cleared the vertical lift plate guides

 And there, straight ahead as Karrde righted them again, was the wide hangar entry port. And beyond it, the black of deep space.

 A half dozen blaster bolts sizzled at them as they shot across the hangar bay above the various ships parked there. But the shooting was reflexive, without any proper setup or aiming, and for the most part the shots went wild. A near miss flashed past the cockpit canopy; and then they were out, jolting through the atmosphere barrier and diving down out of the entry port toward the planet below.

 And as they did so, Luke caught a glimpse across the entry port of TIE fighters from the forward hangar bays scrambling to intercept.

 "Come on, Mara," he said, slipping off his restraints. "You know how to handle a quad laser battery?"

 "No, I need her here," Karrde said. He had theFalcon skimming the underside of the Star Destroyer now, heading for the ship's portside edge. "You go ahead. And take the dorsal grin bayI think I can arrange for them to concentrate their attack from that direction."

 Luke had no idea how he was going to accomplish that, but there was no time to discuss it. Already theFalcon was starting to jolt with laser hits, and from experience he knew there was only so much the ship's deflector shields could handle. Leaving the cockpit, he hurried to the gun well ladder, leaping halfway up, then climbing the rest of the way. He strapped in, fired up the quadsand as he looked around he discovered what Karrde had had in mind. TheFalcon had curved up past the portside edge of theChimaera , swung aft along the upper surface, and was now driving hard for deep space on a vector directly above the exhaust from the Star Destroyer's massive sublight drive nozzles. Skimming rather too close to it, in Luke's opinion; but it was for sure that no TIE fighters would be coming at them from underneath for a while.

 The intercom pinged in his ear. "Skywalker?" Karrde's voice came. "They're almost here. You ready?"

 "I'm ready," Luke assured him. Fingers resting lightly on the firing controls, he focused his mind and let the Force flow into him.

 The battle was furious but short, in some ways reminding Luke of theFalcon 's escape from the Death Star so long ago. Back then, Leia had recognised that they'd gotten away too easily; and as the TIE fighters swarmed and fired and exploded around him, Luke wondered uneasily whether or not the Imperials might have something equally devious in mind this time, too.

 And then the sky flared with starlines and went mottled, and they were free.

 Luke took a deep breath as he cut power to the quads. "Good flying," he said into the intercom.

 "Thank you," Karrde's dry voice came back. "We seem to be more or less clear, though we took some damage around the starboard power converter pack. Mara's gone to check it out."

 "We can manage without it," Luke said. "Han's got the whole ship so cross-wired that it'll fly with half the systems out. Where are we headed?"

 "Coruscant," Karrde said. "To drop you off and also to follow through on the promise I made to you earlier."

 Luke had to search his memory. "You mean that bit about the New Republic standing to gain from your rescue?"

 "That's the one," Karrde assured him. "As I recall Solo's sales pitch to me back on Myrkr, your people are in need of transport ships. Correct?"

 "Badly in need of them," Luke agreed. "You have some stashed away?"

 "Not exactly stashed away, but it won't be too hard to put my hands on them. What do you think the New Republic would say to approximately two hundred pre-Clone Wars vintage Dreadnaught-class heavy cruisers?"

 Luke felt his mouth fall open. Growing up on Tatooine had been a sheltered experience, but it hadn't beenthat sheltered. "You don't mean the Dark Force?"

 "Come on down and we'll discuss it," Karrde said. "Oh, and I wouldn't mention it to Mara just yet."

 "I'll be right there." Turning off the intercom, Luke hung the headset back on its hook and climbed onto the ladder  and for once, he didn't even notice the discontinuity as the gravity field changed direction partway down the ladder.

 

 TheMillennium Falcon shot away from theChimaera , out maneuvering and outgunning its pursuing TIE fighters and driving hard for deep space. Pellaeon sat at his station, hands curled into fists, watching the drama in helpless silence. Helpless, because with the main computer still only partially operational, theChimaera 's sophisticated weapons and tractor beam systems were useless against a ship that small, that fast, and that distant. Silent, because the disaster was far beyond scope of any of his repertoire of curses.

 The ship flickered and was gone and Pellaeon prepared himself for the worst.

 The worst didn't come. "Recall the TIE fighters to their stations, Captain," Thrawn said, his voice showing no sign of strain or anger. "Secure from intruder alert, and have Systems Control continue bringing the main computer back on line. Oh, and the supply unloading can be resumed."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, throwing a surreptitious frown at his superior. Had Thrawn somehow missed the significance of what had just happened out there?

 The glowing red eyes glinted as Thrawn looked at him. "We've lost a round, Captain," he said. "No more."

 "It seems to me, Admiral, that we've lost far more than that," Pellaeon growled. "There's no chance that Karrde won't give theKatana fleet to the Rebellion now."

 "Ah; but he won't simply give it to them," Thrawn corrected, almost lazily. "Karrde's pattern has never been to give anything away for free. He'll attempt to bargain, or else will set conditions the Rebellion will find unsatisfactory. The negotiations will take time, particularly given the suspicious political atmosphere we've taken such pains to create on Coruscant. And a little time is all we need."

 Pellaeon shook his head. "You're assuming that ship thief Ferrier will be able to find the Corellian group's ship supplier before Karrde and the Rebellion work out their differences."

 "There's no assumption involved," Thrawn said softly. "Ferrier is even now on Solo's trail and has extrapolated his destination for us and thanks to Intelligence's excellent work on Karrde's background, I know exactly who the man is we'll be meeting at the end of that trail."

 He gazed out the viewport at the returning TIE fighters. "Instruct Navigation to prepare a course for the Pantolomin system, Captain," he said, his voice thoughtful. "Departure to be as soon as the supply shuttles have been unloaded."

 "Yes, sir," Pellaeon said, nodding the order on to the navigator and doing a quick calculation in his head. Time for theMillennium Falcon to reach Coruscant; time for theChimaera to reach Pantolomin

 "Yes," Thrawn said into his thoughts. "Now it's a race.

 

 CHAPTER
24

 The sun had set over the brown hills of Honoghr, leaving a lingering hint of red and violet in the clouds above the horizon. Leia watched the fading color from just inside thedukha door, feeling the all-too-familiar sense of nervous dread that always came when she was about to go into danger and battle. A few more minutes and she, Chewbacca, and Threepio would be setting out for Nystao, to free Khabarakh and escape. Or to die trying.

 She sighed and walked back into thedukha , wondering dimly where she'd gone wrong on this whole thing. It had seemed so reasonable to come to Honoghrsoright , somehow, to make such a bold gesture of good faith to the Noghri. Even before leaving Kashyyyk she'd been convinced that the offer hadn't been entirely her own idea, but instead the subtle guidance of the Force.

 And perhaps it had been. But not necessarily from the side of the Force she'd assumed.

 A cool breeze whispered in through the doorway, and Leia shivered.The Force is strong in my family. Luke had said those words to her on the eve of the Battle of Endor. She hadn't believed it at first, not until long afterward when his patient training had begun to bring out a hint of those abilities in her. But her father had had that same training and those same abilities and yet had ultimately fallen to the dark side.

 One of the twins kicked. She paused, reaching out to gently touch the two tiny beings within her; and as she did so, fragments of memory flooded in on her. Her mother's face, taut and sad, lifting her from the darkness of the trunk where she'd lain hidden from prying eyes. Unfamiliar faces leaning over her, while her mother spoke to them in a tone that had frightened her and set her crying. Crying again when her mother died, holding tightly to the man she'd learned to call Father.

 Pain and misery and fear and all of it because' of her true father, the man who had renounced the name Anakin Skywalker to call himself Darth Vader.

 There was a faint shuffling sound from the doorway. "What is it, Threepio?" Leia asked, turning to face the droid.

 "Your Highness, Chewbacca has informed me that you will be leaving here soon," Threepio said, his prim voice a little anxious. "May I assume that I will be accompanying you?"

 "Yes, of course," Leia told him. "Whatever happens in Nystao, I don't think you'll want to be here for the aftermath."

 "I quite agree." The droid hesitated, and Leia could see in his stance that his anxiety hadn't been totally relieved. "There is, however, something that I really think you should know," he continued. "One of the decon droids has been acting very strangely."

 "Really?" Leia said. "What exactly does this strangeness consist of?"

 "He seems far too interested in everything," Threepio said. "He has asked a great number of questions, not only about you and Chewbacca, but also about me. I've also seen him moving about the village after he was supposed to be shut down for the night."

 "Probably just an improper memory wipe the last time around," Leia said, not really in the mood for a fullblown discussion of droid personality quirks. "I could name one or two other droids who have more curiosity than their original programming intended."

 "Your Highness!" Threepio protested, sounding wounded. "Artoo is a different case altogether."

 "I wasn't referring only to Artoo." Leia held up a hand to forestall further discussion. "But I understand your concerns. I tell you what: you keep an eye on this droid for me. All right?"

 "Of course, Your Highness," Threepio said. He gave a little bow and shuffled his way back out into the gathering dusk.

 Leia sighed and looked around her. Her restless wandering around thedukha had brought her to the genealogy wall chart, and for a long minute she gazed at it. There was a deep sense of history present in the carved wood; a sense of history, and a quiet but deep family pride. She let her eyes trace the connections between the names, wondering what the Noghri themselves thought and felt as they studied it. Did they see their triumphs and failures both, or merely their triumphs? Both, she decided. The Noghri struck her as a people who didn't deliberately blind themselves to reality.

 "Do you see in the wood the end of our family, Lady Vader?"

 Leia jumped. "I sometimes wish you people weren't so good at that," she growled as she regained her balance.

 "Forgive me," the maitrakh said, perhaps a bit dryly. "I did not mean to startle you." She gestured at the chart. "Do you see our end there, Lady Vader?"

 Leia shook her head. "I have no vision of any future, maitrakh. Not yours; not even mine. I was just thinking about children. Trying to imagine what it's like to try to raise them. Wondering how much of their character a family can mold, and how much is innate in the children them selves." She hesitated. "Wondering if the evil in a family's history can be erased, or whether it always passes itself on to each new generation."

 The maitrakh tilted her head slightly, the huge eyes studying Leia's face. "You speak as one newly facing the challenge of child-service.

 "Yes," Leia admitted, her hand caressing her belly. "I don't know if Khabarakh told you, but I'm carrying my first two children."

 "And you fear for them."

 Leia felt a muscle in her cheek twitch. "With good reason. The Empire wants to take them from me."

 The maitrakh hissed softly. "Why?"

 "I'm not sure. But the purpose can only be an evil one."

 The maitrakh dropped her gaze. "I'm sorry, Lady Vader. I would help you if I could."

 Leia reached over to touch the Noghri's shoulder. "I know."

 The maitrakh looked up at the genealogy chart. "I sent all four of my sons into danger, Lady Vader. To the Emperor's battles. It never becomes easier to watch them go forth to war and death."

 Leia thought of all her allies and companions who had died in the long war. "I've sent friends to their deaths," she said quietly. "That was hard enough. I can't imagine sending my children."

 "Three of them died," the maitrakh continued, almost as if talking to herself. "Far from home, with none but their companions to mourn them. The fourth became a cripple, and returned home to live his shortened life in the silent despair of dishonor before death released him."

 Leia grimaced. And now, as the cost for helping her, Khabarakh was facing both dishonor and death

 The line of thought paused. "Wait a minute. You said all four of your sons went to war? And that all four have since died?"

 The maitrakh nodded. "That is correct."

 "But then what about Khabarakh? Isn't he also your son?"

 "He is my thirdson," the maitrakh said, a strange expression on her face. "A son of the son of my firstson."

 Lela looked at her, a sudden horrible realization flashing through her. If Khabarakh was not her son but instead her great-grandson; and if the maitrakh had personally witnessed the space battle that had brought destruction on Honoghr "Maitrakh, how long has your world been like this?" she breathed. "How many years?"

 The Noghri stared at her, clearly sensing the sudden change in mood. "Lady Vader, what have I said?"

 "How many years?"

 The maitrakh twitched away from her. "Forty-eight Noghri years," she said. "In years of the Emperor, forty-four."

 Leia put her hand against the smooth wood of the genealogy chart, her knees suddenly feeling weak with shock. Forty-four years. Not the five or eight or even ten that she'd assumed. Forty-four. "It didn't happen during the Rebellion," she heard herself say. "It happened during the Clone Wars."

 And suddenly the shock gave way to a wall of blazing white anger. "Forty-four years, she snarled. "They've held you like this forforty-four years ?"

 She spun to face the door. "Chewie!" she called, for the moment not caring who might hear her. "Chewie, get in here!"

 A hand gripped her shoulder, and she turned back around to find the maitrakh gazing at her, an unreadable expression on her alien face. "Lady Vader, you will tell me what is the matter."

 "Forty-four years, maitrakh, is what's the matter," Leia told her. The fiery heat of her anger was fading, leaving behind an icy resolve. "They've held you in slavery for almost half a century. Lying through their teeth to you, cheating you, murdering your sons." She jabbed a finger down toward the ground beneath their feet. "Thatis not forty-four years' worth of decontamination work. And if they aren't just cleaning the dirt

 There was a heavy footstep at the door and Chewbacca charged in, bowcaster at the ready. He saw Leia, roared a question as his weapon swung to cover the maitrakh.

 "I'm not in danger, Chewie," Leia told him. "Just very angry. I need you to get me some more samples from the contaminated area. Not soil this time: some of thekholm-grass ."

 She could see the surprise in the Wookie's face. But he merely growled an acknowledgment and left. "Why do you wish to examine the kholm grass?" the maitrakh asked.

 "You said yourself it smelled different than before the rains came," Leia reminded her. "I think there may be a connection here we've missed."

 "What connection could there be?"

 Leia shook her head. "I don't want to say anything more right now, maitrakh. Not until I'm sure."

 "Do you still wish to go to Nystao?"

 "More than ever," Leia said grimly. "But not to hit and run. If Chewie's samples show what I think they will, I'm going to go straight to the dynasts."

 "What if they refuse to listen?"

 Leia took a deep breath. "They can't refuse," she said. "You've already lost three generations of your sons. You can't afford to lose any more.

 For a minute the Noghri gazed at her in silence. "You speak truth," she said. She hissed softly between her needle teeth, and with her usual fluid grace moved toward the door. "I will return within the hour," she said over her shoulder. "Will you be ready to leave then?"

 "Yes," Leia nodded. "Where are you going?"

 The maitrakh paused at the door, her dark eyes locking onto Leia's. "You speak truth, Lady Vader: they must listen. I will be back."

 

 The maitrakh returned twenty minutes later, five minutes ahead of Chewbacca. The Wookiee had collected a double handful of thekholm-grass from widely scattered sites and retrieved the analysis unit from its hiding place in the decon droid shed. Leia got the unit started on a pair of the ugly brown plants and they set off for Nystao.

 But not alone. To Leia's surprise, a young Noghri female was already seated at the driver's seat of the open topped landspeeder the maitrakh had obtained for them; and as they drove through the village at a brisk walking pace a dozen more Noghri joined them, striding along on both sides of the landspeeder like an honor guard. The maitrakh herself walked next to the vehicle, her face unreadable in the dim reflected light from the instrument panel. Sitting in the back seat next to the analysis unit, Chewbacca fingered his bowcaster and rumbled distrustingly deep in his throat. Behind him, wedged into the luggage compartment at the rear of the vehicle, Threepio was uncharacteristically quiet.

 They passed through the village into the surrounding cropland, running without lights, the small group of Noghri around them virtually invisible in the cloudshrouded starlight. The party reached another village, barely distinguishable from the cropland now that its own lights were darkened for the night, and passed through without incident. More cropland; another village; more cropland. Occasionally Leia caught glimpses of the lights of Nystao far' ahead, and she wondered uneasily whether confronting the dynasts directly was really the wisest course of action at this point. They ruled with the assistance or at least the tacit consent of the Empire, and to accuse them of collaboration with a lie would not sit well with such a proud and honor-driven people.

 And then, in the northeast sky, the larger of Honoghr's three moons broke through a thick cloud bank and with a shock Leia saw that she and her original escort were no longer alone. All around them was an immense sea of shadowy figures, flowing like a silent tide along the landspeeder's path.

 Behind her, Chewbacca growled surprise of his own. With his hunter's senses he had already been aware that the size of their party was increasing with each village they passed, through. But even he hadn't grasped the full extent of the recruitment, and wasn't at all certain he liked it.

 But Leia found some of the tightness in her chest easing as she settled back against the landspeeder's cushions. Whatever happened in Nystao now, the sheer size of the assemblage would make it impossible for the dynasts to simply arrest her and cover up the fact that she'd ever been there.

 The maitrakh had guaranteed her a chance to speak. The rest would be up to her.

 

 They reached the edge of Nystao just before sunrise to find another crowd of Noghri waiting for them.

 "Word has arrived ahead of us," the maitrakh told Leia as the land speeder and its escort moved toward them. "They have come to see the daughter of the Lord Vader and to hear her message."

 Leia looked at the crowd. "And what is the message you've told them to expect?"

 "That the debt of honor to the Empire has been paid in full," the maitrakh said. "That you have come to offer a new life for the Noghri people."

 Her dark eyes bored into Leia's face in unspoken question. Leia looked in turn over her shoulder at Chewbacca, and raised her eyebrows. The Wookiee rumbled an affirmative and tilted the analysis unit up to show her the display.

 Sometime during their midnight journey the unit had finally finished its workand as she read the analysis, Leia felt a fresh stirring of her earlier anger toward the Empire at what they'd done to these people. "Yes," she told the maitrakh. "I can indeed prove that the debt has been paid."

 Nearer now to the waiting crowd, she could see in the dusky light that most of the Noghri were females. The relative handful of males she could spot were either the very light gray skin tone of children and young adolescents or the much darker gray of the elderly. But directly in line with the landspeeder's path were a group of about ten males with the steely-gray color of young adults. "I see the dynasts have heard the word, too," she said.

 "That is our official escort," the maitrakh said. "they will accompany us to the GrandDukha , where the dynasts await you."

 The official escortor guards, or soldiers; Lela wasn't quite sure how to think of themremained silent as they walked in arrowhead formation in front of the landspeeder. The rest of the crowd was alive with whispered conversation, most of it between the city dwellers and the villagers. What they were saying Leia didn't know; but wherever her eyes turned the Noghri fell silent and gazed back in obvious fascination.

 The city was smaller than Leia had expected, particularly given the limited land area the Noghri had available to them. After only a few minutes, they arrived at the GrandDukha .

 From its name Leia had expected it to be simply a larger version of thedukha back in the village. It was certainly larger; but despite the similarity in design, there was a far different sense to this version. Its walls and roof were made of a silver-blue metal instead of wood, with no carvings of any sort on their surfaces. The supporting pillars were blackmetal or worked stone, Leia couldn't tell which. A wide set of black-and-red-marbled steps led up to a gray flagstone entrance terrace outside the double doors. The whole thing seemed cold and remote, very different from the mental picture of the Noghri ethos that she'd built up over the past few days. Fleetingly, she wondered if the GrandDukha had been built not by the Noghri, but by the Empire.

 At the top of the steps stood a row of thirteen middle aged Noghri males, each wearing an elaborately tooled garment that looked like a cross between a vest and a shawl. Behind them, his arms and legs chained to a pair of upright posts in the middle of the terrace, was Khabarakh.

 Leia gazed past the row of dynasts at him, a ripple of sympathetic ache running through her. The maitrakh had described the mechanics of a Noghri public humiliation to her; but it was only as she looked at him that she began to grasp the full depth of the shame involved in the ritual. Khabarakh's face was haggard and pale, and he sagged with fatigue against the chains holding his wrists and upper arms. But his head was upright, his dark eyes alert and watching.

 The crowd parted to both sides as the landspeeder reached thedukha area, forming a passage for the vehicle to move through. The official escort went up the stairs, forming a line between the crowd and the row of dynasts. "Remember, we're not here to fight," Leia murmured to Chewbacca; and summoning every bit of regal demeanor she could muster, she stepped out of the landspeeder and walked up the stairs.

 The last rustle of conversation in the crowd behind her vanished as she reached the top. "I greet you, dynasts of the Noghri people," she said in a loud voice. "I am Leia Organa Solo, daughter of your Lord Darth Vader. He who came to you in your distress, and brought you aid." She held out the back of her hand toward the Noghri in the center of the line.

 He gazed at her for a moment without moving. Then, with obvious reluctance, he stepped forward and gingerly sniffed at her hand. He repeated the test twice before straightening up again. "The Lord Vader is dead," he said. "Our new lord the Grand Admiral has ordered us to bring you to him, Leia Organa Solo. You will come with us to await the preparation of transport."

 From the bottom of the steps Chewbacca growled warningly. Leia quieted him with a gesture and shook her head. "I have not come here to surrender to your Grand Admiral," she told the dynast.

 "You will do so nonetheless," he said. He signaled, and two of the guards left their line and moved toward Leia.

 She stood her ground, again signaling Chewbacca to do the same. "Do you serve the Empire, then, or the people of Honoghr?"

 "All Noghri of honor serve both," the dynast said.

 "Indeed?" Leia said. "Does serving Honoghr now mean sending generation after generation of young men to die in the Empire's wars?"

 "You are an alien," the dynast said contemptuously. "You know nothing about the honor of the Noghri." He nodded to the guards now standing at Leia's sides. "Take her into thedukha ."

 "Are you then so afraid of the words of a lone alien woman?" Leia asked as the Noghri took her arms in a firm grip. "Or is it that you fear your own power will be diminished by my coming?

 "You will speak no words of discord and poison!" the dynast snarled.

 Chewbacca rumbled again, and Leia could sense him preparing to leap up the stairs to her aid. "My words are not of discord," she said, raising her voice loud enough for the whole crowd to hear. "My words are of treachery."

 There was a sudden stirring from the crowd. "You will be silent," the dynast insisted. "Or I will have you silenced."

 "I would hear her speak," the maitrakh called from below.

 "You will be silent as well!" the dynast barked as the crowd murmured approval of the maitrakh's demand. "You have no place or speech here, maitrakh of the clan Kihm'bar. I have not called a convocate of the Noghri people."

 "Yet the convocate is here," the maitrakh countered. "The Lady Vader has come. We would hear her words."

 "Then you will hear them in prison." The dynast gestured, and two more of the official guard left their line, heading purposefully toward the steps.

 It was, Leia judged, the right moment. Glancing down at her belt, she reached out through the Force with all the power and control she could manage

 And her lightsaber leaped from her belt, breaking free from its quick-release and jumping up in front of her. Her eyes and mind found the switch, and with asnap-hiss the brilliant green-white blade flashed into existence, carving out a vertical line between her and the line of dynasts.

 There was a sound like a hissing gasp from the crowd. The two Noghri who had been moving toward the maitrakh froze in midstrideand as the gasp vanished into utter silence, Leia knew that she'd finally gotten their complete attention. "I am not merely the daughter of the Lord Vader," she said, putting an edge of controlled anger into her voice. "I am theMal'ary'ush : heir to his authority and his power. I have come through many dangers to reveal the treachery that has been done to the Noghri people."

 She withdrew as much of her concentration as she could risk from the floating lightsaber to look slowly down the line of dynasts. "Will you hear me? Or will you instead choose death?"

 For a long minute the silence remained unbroken. Leia listened to the thudding of her heart and the deep hum of the lightsaber, wondering how long she could hold the weapon steady in midair before losing control of it. And then, from halfway down the line to her left, one of the dynasts took a step forward. "I would hear the words of theMal'ary'ush ," he said.

 The first dynast spat. "Do not add your own discord, Ir'khaim," he warned. "You see here only a chance to save the honor of the clan Kihm'bar.

 "Perhaps I see a chance to save the honor of the Noghri people, Vor'corkh," Ir'khaim retorted. "I would hear theMal'ary'ush speak. Do I stand alone?"

 Silently, another dynast stepped forward to join him. Then another did so; and another, and another, until nine of the thirteen stood with Ir'khaim. Vor'corkh hissed between his teeth, but stepped back to his place in line. "The dynasts of Honoghr have chosen," he growled. "You may speak."

 The two guards released her arms. Leia counted out two more seconds before reaching a hand up to take the lightsaber and close it down. "I will tell the story twice," she said, turning to the crowd as she returned the weapon to her belt. "Once as the Empire has told you; once as it truly is. You may then decide for yourselves whether or not the Noghri debt has been paid.

 "You all know the history of how your world was devastated by the battle in space. How many of the Noghri were killed by the volcanoes and earthquakes and killer seas that followed, until a remnant arrived here to this place. How the Lord Darth Vader came to you, and offered you aid. How after the falling of the strange-smelling rains all plants except thekholm -grass withered and died. How the Empire told you the ground had been poisoned with chemicals from the destroyed ship, and offered machines to clean the soil for you. And you know all too well the price they demanded for those machines."

 "Yet the ground is indeed poisoned," one of the dynasts told her. "I and many others have tried through the years to grow food in places where the machines have not been. But the seed was wasted, for nothing would grow."

 "Yes," Leia nodded. "But it was not the soil that was poisoned. Or rather, not the soil directly."

 She signaled to Chewbacca. Reaching back into the landspeeder, he picked up the analyzer unit and one of thekholm-grass plants and brought them up the steps to her. "I will now tell you the story that is true," Leia said as the Wookiee went back down the steps. "After the Lord Vader left in his ship, other ships came. They flew far and wide over your world. To any who asked they probably said they were surveying the land, perhaps searching for other survivors or other habitable places. But that was all a lie. Their true purpose was to seed your world with a new type of plant." She held up thekholm -grass. "This plant."

 "Your truth is dreams," the dynast Vor'corkh spat. "Kholm-grass has grown on Honoghr since the beginning of knowledge."

 "I didn't say this waskholm -grass," Leia countered. "It looks like thekholm -grass you remember, and even smells very much like it. But not exactly. It is, in fact, a subtle creation of the Empiresent by the Emperor to poison your world."

 The silence of the crowd broke into a buzz of stunned conversation. Leia gave them time, letting her gaze drift around the area as she waited. There must be close to a thousand Noghri pressed around the GrandDukha , she estimated, and more were still coming into the area. The word about her must still be spreading, she decided, and glanced around to see where they were coming from.

 And as she looked off to her left a slight glint of metal caught her eye. Well back from the GrandDukha , half hidden in the long early-morning shadows beside another building, was the boxy shape of a decon droid.

 Leia stared at it, a shiver of sudden horror running through her. A decon droid with unusual curiosityThreepio had mentioned that, but she'd been too preoccupied at the time to pay any attention to his concerns. But for a decon droid to be in Nystao, fifty kilometers or more from its designated work area, was far more than just over developed curiosity. It had to be

 She squatted down, mentally berating herself for her carelessness. Of course the Grand Admiral wouldn't have just flitted away on the spur of the moment. Not without leaving someone or something to keep an eye on things. "Chewieover there to your right," she hissed. "Looks like a decon droid, but I think it's an espionage droid."

 The Wookiee growled something vicious and started pushing his way through the crowd. But even as the Noghri made way for him, Leia knew he would never make it. Espionage droids weren't brilliant, but they were smart enough to know not to hang around after their cover had been blown. Long before Chewbacca could get over there it would be off and running. If it had a transmitterand if there were any Imperial ships within range

 "People of Honoghr!" she shouted over the conversation. "I will prove to you right now the truth of what I say. One of the Empiror's decon droids is there." She pointed to it. "Bring it to me.

 The crowd turned to look, and Leia could sense their uncertainty. But before anyone could move, the droid abruptly vanished around the corner of the building it had been skulking beside. A second later Leia caught a glimpse of it between two other buildings, scuttling away for all it was worth.

 It was, tactically, the worst decision the droid could have made. Running away was as good as admitting guilt, particularly in front of a people who had grown up with the things and knew exactly what the normal behavioral range of a decon droid was. The crowd roared, and from the rear perhaps fifty of the older adolescents took off after it.

 And as they did so, one of the guards on the terrace beside Leia cupped his hand around his mouth and sent a piercing half-scream into the air.

 Leia jerked away, ears ringing with the sound. The guard screamed again, and this time there was an answer from somewhere in the near distance. The guard switched to a warble that sounded like a complicated medley of birdcalls; a short reply, and both fell silent. "He calls others to the hunt," the maitrakh told Leia.

 Leia nodded, squeezing her hands into fists as she watched the pursuers disappear around a corner after the droid. If the droid had a transmitter it would right now be frantically dumping its data

 And then, suddenly, the pursuers were back in sight, accompanied by a half dozen adult Noghri males. Held aloft like the prize from a hunt, still wiggling uselessly in their grip, was the droid.

 Leia took a deep breath. "Bring it here to me," she said as the party approached. They did so, six of the adolescents lugging it up the stairs and laying it on its back on the terrace. Leia ignited her lightsaber, her eyes searching the droid as she did so for signs of a concealed antenna port. She couldn't see one, but that by itself didn't prove anything. Steeling herself for the worst, she sliced a vertical cut through the droid's outer shell. Two more crosswise cuts, and its internal workings were laid out for all to see.

 Chewbacca was already kneeling beside the droid as Leia shut down her lightsaber, his huge fingers probing delicately among the maze of tubes and cables and fibers. Near the top of the cavity was a small gray box. He threw a significant look at Leia and pulled it free from its connections.

 Leia swallowed as he laid it on the ground beside him. She recognized it, all right, from long and sometimes bitter experience: the motivator recorder unit from an Imperial probe droid. But the antenna connector jack was empty. Luck, or the Force, was still with them.

 Chewbacca was poking around the lower part of the cavity now. Leia watched as he pulled several cylinders out of the tangle, examined their markings, and returned them to their places. The crowd was starting to murmur again when, with a satisfied murmur of his own, he pulled out a large cylinder and slender needle from near the intake hopper.

 Gingerly, Leia took the cylinder from him. It shouldn't be dangerous to her, but there was no point in taking chances. "I call on the dynasts to bear witness that this cylinder was indeed taken from the inside of this machine," she called to the crowd.

 "Is this your proof?" Ir'khaim asked, eyeing the cylinder doubtfully.

 "It is," Leia nodded. "I have said that these plants are not thekholm -grass you remember from before the disaster. But I have not yet said what is different about them." Picking up one of the plants, she held it up for them to see. "The Emperor's scientists took yourkholm -grass and changed it," she told the crowd. "They created differences that would breed true between generations. The altered smell you have noticed is caused by a chemical which the stem, roots, and leaves secrete. A chemical which has one purpose only: to inhibit the growth of all other plant life. The machines that the Grand Admiral claims are cleaning the ground are in fact doing nothing but destroying this specialkholm -grass which the Empire planted."

 "Your truth is again dreams," Vor'corldi scoffed. "The droid machines require nearly two tens of days to cleanse a singlepirkha of land. My daughters could destroy thekholm-grass there in one."

 Leia smiled grimly. "Perhaps the machines don't require as much time as it appears. Let's find out." Holding thekholm -grass out in front of her, she eased a drop of pale liquid from the tip of the needle and touched it to the stem.

 It was as dramatic a demonstration as she could have hoped for. The drop soaked through the dull brown surface of the plant, and for a handful of seconds nothing seemed to happen. There was a faint sizzling sound; and then, without warning, the plant suddenly began to turn black and wither. There was a hissing gasp from the crowd as the patch of catalytic destruction spread along the stem toward the leaves and roots. Leia held it up a moment longer, then dropped it on the terrace. There it lay, writhing like a dry branch thrown into a fire, until there was nothing left but a short and unrecognizable filament of wrinkled black. Leia touched it tentatively with the toe of her hoot, and it disintegrated into a fine powder.

 She had expected another outburst of surprise or outrage from the crowd. Their dead silence was in its own way more unnerving than any noise would have been. The Noghri understood the implications of the demonstration, all right.

 And as she looked around at their faces, she knew that she'd won.

 She put the cylinder down on the terrace beside the destroyed plant and turned to face the dynasts. "I have shown you my proof," she said. "You must now decide whether the Noghri debt has been paid."

 She looked at Vor'corkh; and moved by an impulse she couldn't explain, she unhooked her lightsaber from her belt and put it in his hand. Stepping past him, she went over to Khabarakh. "I'm sorry," she said softly. "I didn't expect for you to have to go through anything like this because of me."

 Khabarath opened his mouth in a needle-toothed Noghri smile. "The Empire has long taught us that it is a honor pride and duty to face pain for his overlord. Should I do less for theMal'ary'ush of the Lord Vader?"

 Leia shook her head. "I'm not your overlord, Khabarakh, and I never will be. The Noghri are a free people. I came only to try to restore that freedom to you."

 "And to bring us on your side against the Empire," Vor'corkh said caustically from behind her.

 Leia turned. "That would be my wish," she agreed. "But I do not ask it."

 Vor'corkh studied her a moment. Then, reluctantly, he handed her lightsaber back to her. "The dynasts of Honoghr cannot and will not make so important a decision in a single day," he said. "There is much to consider, and a full convocate of the Noghri people must be called."

 "Then call it," Khabarakh urged. "TheMal'ary'ush of the Lord Vader is here."

 "And can theMal'ary'ush protect us from the might of the Empire, should we choose to defy it?" Vor'corkh countered.

 "But"

 "No, Khabarakh, he's right," Leia said. "The Empire would rather kill you all than let you defect or even become neutral."

 "Have the Noghri forgotten how to fight?" Khabarakh scoffed.

 "And has Khabarakh clan Kihm'bar forgotten what happened to Honoghr forty-eight years ago?" Vor'corkh snapped. "If we left the Empire now, we would have no option but to leave our world and hide."

 "And doing that would guarantee the instant slaughter of the commando teams that are out serving the Empire," Leia pointed out to Khabarakh. "Would you have them die without even knowing the reason? There is no honor in that."

 "You speak wisdom, Lady Vader," Vor'corkh said, and for the first time Leia thought she could detect a trace of grudging respect in his eyes. "True warriors understand the value of patience. You will leave us now?"

 "Yes," Leia nodded. "My presence here is still a danger to you. I would ask one favor: that you would allow Khabarakh to return me to my ship."

 Vor'corkh looked at Khabarakh. "Khabarakh's family conspired to free him," he said. "They succeeded, and he escaped into space. Three commando teams who were here on leave have followed in pursuit. The entire clan Kihm'bar will be in disgrace until they yield up the names of those responsible."

 Leia nodded. It was as good a story as any. "Just he sure to warn the commandos you send to be careful when they make contact with the other teams. If even a hint of this gets back to the Empire, they'll destroy you."

 "Do not presume to tell warriors their job," Vor'corkh retorted. He hesitated. "Can you obtain more of this for us?" he asked, gesturing back at the cylinder.

 "Yes," Leia said. "We'll need to go to Endor first and pick up my ship. Khabarakh can accompany me back to Coruscant then and I'll get him a supply."

 The dynast hesitated. "There is no way to bring it sooner?"

 A fragment of conversation floated up from Leia's memory: the maitrakh, mentioning that the window for planting this season's crops was almost closed. "There might be," she said. "Khabarakh, how much time would we save if we skipped Endor and went directly to Coruscant?"

 "Approximately four days, Lady Vader," he said.

 Leia nodded. Han would kill her for leaving his belovedFalcon sitting in orbit at Endor like that, but there was no way around it. "All right," she nodded. "That's what we'll do, then. Don't forget to be careful where you use it, thoughyou can't risk incoming Imperial ships spotting new cropland."

 "Do not presume, either, to tell farmers their job," Vor'corkh said; but this time there was a touch of dry humor in his voice. "We will eagerly await its arrival."

 "Then we'd better leave at once," Leia said. She looked past him to the maitrakh, and nodded her head in thanks. Finallyfinallyeverything was starting to go their way. Despite her earlier doubts, the Force was clearly with her.

 Turning back to Khabarakh, she ignited her lightsaber and cut him loose from his chains. "Come on, Khabarakh," she said. "Time to go."

 

 CHAPTER
25

 TheCoral Vanda billed itself as the most impressive casino in the galaxyand as he looked around the huge and ornate Tralla Room, Han could understand why he'd never heard of anyone challenging that claim.

 The room had at least a dozen sabacc tables scattered around its three half-levels, plus a whole range of lugjack bars, tregald booths, halo-chess tables, and even a few of the traditional horseshoe-shaped warp-tops favored by hard-core crinbid fanatics. A bar bisecting the room stocked most anything a customer would want to drink, either to celebrate a win or forget a loss, and there was a serving window built into the back wall for people who didn't want to stop playing even to eat.

 And when you got tired of looking at your cards or into your glass, there was the view through the full-wall transparent outer hull. Rippling blue-green water, hundreds of brilliantly colored fish and small sea mammals; and around all of it the intricate winding loops and fans of the famous Pantolomin coral reefs.

 The Tralla Room was, in short, as fine a casino as Han had ever seen in his life and theCoral Vanda had seven other rooms just like it.

 Sitting at the bar beside him, Lando downed the last of his drink and pushed the glass away from him. "So what now?" he asked.

 "He's here, Lando," Han told him, tearing his gaze from the reef outside and looking one more time around the casino. "Somewhere."

 "I think he's skipped this trip," Lando disagreed. "Probably ran out of money. Remember what Sena saidthe guy spends it like poisoned water."

 "Yeah, but if he was out of money he'd be trying to sell them another ship," Han pointed out. He drained his own glass an,d got up from his seat. "Come onone more room to go."

 "And then we do it all over again," Lando growled. "And again, and again. It's a waste of time."

 "You got any other ideas?"

 "Matter of fact, I do," Lando said as they swung wide to get around a large Herglic balanced precariously across of two of the seats and headed down the bar toward the exit. "Instead of just wandering around like we have for the past six hours, we should plant ourselves at a sabac table somewhere and start dropping some serious money. Word'll get around that there are a couple of pikers ripe for plucking; and if this guy loses money as fast as Sena says, he'll be plenty interested in trying to make some of it back."

 Han looked at his friend in mild surprise. He'd had the same idea a couple of hours ago, but hadn't figured on Lando going for it. "You think your professional gambler's pride can take that kind of beating?"

 Lando looked him straight in the eye. "If it'll get me out of here and back to my mining operation, my pride can take anything."

 Han grimaced. He sometimes forgot that he'd kind of dragged Lando into all of this. "Yeah," he said. "Sorry. Okay, tell you what. We'll give the Saffkin Room one last look. If he's not there, we'll come back here and"

 He broke off. There on the bar, in front of an empty seat, was a tray with a still-smoldering cigarra sitting in it. A cigarra with an unusual but very familiar aroma to it

 "Uh-oh," Lando said quietly at his shoulder.

 "I don't believe it," Han said, dropping his hand to his blaster as he threw a quick look around the crowded room.

 "Believe it, buddy," Lando said. He touched the cushion of the vacant seat. "It's still warm. He must bethere he is."

 It was Niles Ferrier, all right, standing beneath the ornate shimmerglass exit archway, another of his ever present cigarras gripped between his teeth. He grinned at them, made a sort of mock salute, and disappeared out the door.

 "Well, that's just great," Lando said. "Now what?"

 "He wants us to follow him," Han said, throwing a quick glance around them. He didn't see anyone he recognized, but that didn't mean anything. Ferrier's people were probably all around them. "Let's go see what he's up to."

 "It could be a trap," Lando warned.

 "Or he could be ready to deal," Han countered. "Keep your blaster ready."

 "No kidding."

 They were halfway to the archway when they heard it: a short, deep-toned thud like a distant crack of thunder. It was followed by another, louder one, and then a third. The conversational din of the casino faltered as others paused to listen; and as they did so, theCoral Vanda seemed to tremble a little.

 Han looked at Lando. "You thinking what I'm thinking?" he muttered.

 "Turbolaser bursts hitting the water," Lando murmured grimly. "Ferrier's dealing, all right. Only not with us."

 Han nodded, feeling a hard knot settle into his stomach. Ferrier had gone ahead and made a deal with the Empire and if the Imperials got their hands on theKatana fleet, the balance of power in the ongoing war would suddenly be skewed back in their favor.

 And under the command of a Grand Admiral

 "We've got to find that ship dealer, and fast," he said, hurrying toward the exit. "Maybe we can get him out in an escape pod or something before we're boarded."

 "Hopefully, before the rest of the passengers start panicking," Lando added. "Let's go.

 They'd made it to the archway when their time ran out. There was a sudden thunderclap, not distant this time but seemingly right on top of them, and for a second the coral reef outside the transparent hull lit up with an angry green light. TheCoral Vanda lurched like a wounded animal, and Han grabbed at the edge of the archway for balance

 Something caught his arm and pulled hard, yanking him out of the archway to his right. He grabbed reflexively for his blaster, but before he could draw it strong furry arms wrapped around his chest and face, pinning his gun hand to his side and blotting out all view of the sudden panic in the corridor. He tried to shout, but the arm was blocking his mouth as well as his eyes. Struggling uselessly, swearing under what breath he could get, he was hauled back was down the corridor. Two more thunderclaps came, the second nearly throwing both him and his attacker off their feet. A change of direction sidewayshis elbow banged against the side of a doorway

 A hard shove and he was free again, gasping for breath. He was in a small drinks storage room, with crates of bottles lining three of the walls almost to the ceiling. Several had already been knocked to the floor by theCoral Vanda 's lurching, and out of one of them a dark red liquid was oozing.

 Lounging beside the door, grinning again, was Ferrier. "Hello, Solo," he said. "Nice of you to drop in."

 "It was too kind an invitation to turn down," Han said sourly, looking around. His blaster was hovering in front of a stack of crates two meters away, right in the middle of a thick and strangely solid shadow.

 "You remember my wraith, of course," Ferrier said blandly, gesturing at the shadow. "He's the one who sneaked up onto theLady Luck 's ramp to plant our backup homing beacon. The one inside the ship."

 So that was how Ferrier had managed to get here so fast. Another thunderclap shook theCoral Vanda , and another crate tottered too far and crashed to the floor. Han jumped back out of the way and took a closer look at the shadow. This time he was able to pick out the eyes and a glint of white fangs. He'd always thought wraiths were just space legend. Apparently not. "It's not too late to make a deal," he told Ferrier.

 The other gave him a look of surprise. "Thisis your deal, Solo," he said. "Why else do you think you're in here instead of out where shooting's about to start? We're just going to keep you here, nice and safe, until things settle down again." He cocked an eyebrow. "Calrissian, nowhe's another story."

 Han frowned at him. "What do you mean?"

 "I mean that I'm tired of him getting in my way," Ferrier said softly. "So when theCoral Vanda finally gives up and surfaces, I'm going to make sure he's right up there in front, trying valiantly to protect poor Captain Hoffner from the evil stormtroopers. With any luck" He spread his hands and smiled.

 "Hoffner's the guy's name huh?" Han said, fighting his anger down. Getting mad wasn't going to help Lando any. "Suppose he's not on board? The Imperials won't be happy about that."

 "Oh, he's aboard," Ferrier assured him. "Getting a little stircrazy. though. He's been sort of locked in our suite since about an hour after we sailed."

 "You sure you got the right guy?"

 Ferrier shrugged. "If not, the Grand Admiral has only himself to blame. He's the one who supplied me with the name."

 Another blast rocked the ship. "Well, nice talking to you, Solo, but I've got a deal to close," Ferrier said, regaining his balance and hitting the door release. "See you around."

 "We'll pay you twice what the Empire's offering," Han said, trying one last time.

 Ferrier didn't even bother to answer. Smiling one last time, he slipped out the door and closed it behind him.

 Han looked at the shadow that was the wraith. "How about you?" he asked. "You want to be rich?"

 The wraith showed its teeth, but made no other reply. There was another thunderclap, and they were jerked hard to the side. TheCoral Vanda was a well-built ship, but Han knew it couldn't stand up to this kind of pounding for long. Sooner or later, it would have to give up and surfaceand then the stormtroopers would come.

 He had just that long to find a way out of here.

 

 TheChimaera 's turbolaser batteries fired again, and on the bridge holo display a short red line dug briefly into the sea near the tapered black cylinder that marked theCoral Vanda 's position. For an instant the red line was sheathed in the pale green of seawater suddenly flashed into superheated steam; and then the pale green spread outward in all directions, and theCoral Vanda rocked visibly as the shock wave passed it. "They're stubborn, I'll give them that," Pellaeon commented.

 "They have a great many wealthy patrons aboard," Thrawn reminded him. "Many of whom would rather drown than give up their money under threat of force."

 Pellaeon glanced at his readouts. "It won't be long until they're at that choice. Main propulsion's been knocked out, and they're developing microfractures in their hull seams. Computer projects that if they don't surface in ten minutes, they won't be able to."

 "They're a ship full of gamblers, Captain," Thrawn said. "They'll gamble on the strength of their ship while they seek an alternative."

 Pellaeon frowned at the holo display. "What alternative could they possibly have?"

 "Observe." Thrawn touched his board, and a small white circle appeared on the holo in front of theCoral Vanda , extending backward like the path of a crazed worm. "There appears to be a path here beneath this section of the reef that would allow them to evade us, at least temporarily. I believe that's where they're heading."

 "They'll never make it," Pellaeon decided. "Not the way they're bouncing around down there. Best to be sure, though. A shot right at the entrance to that maze should do it."

 "Yes," Thrawn said, his voice meditative. "A pity, though, to have to damage any of these reefs. They're genuine works of art. Unique, perhaps, in that they were created by living yet nonsentient beings. I should have liked to have studied them more closely."

 He turned to Pellaeon again, gave a short nod. "You may fire when ready."

 

 There was another clap of thunder as the Imperial ship overhead flash-boiled the water near them and as theCoral Vanda lurched to the side Han made his move.

 Letting the ship's motion throw him sideways, he half staggered, half fell across the storeroom to slam into one of the stacks of crates, turning at the last instant so that his back was to them. His hands, flung up over his head as if for balance, found the bottom corners of the topmost crate; and as the force of his impact shook the stack, he brought the box tipping over on top of him. He let it roll a quarter rotation toward his head, then shifted his grip and shoved it as hard as he could toward the wraith.

 The alien caught it square on the upper torso, lost his balance, and crashed backward to the floor.

 Han was on him in a second, kicking his blaster out of the wraith's hand and jumping after it. He caught up with the weapon, spun back up. The wraith had gotten clear of the box and was scrambling to get back to his feet on a floor now slippery with spilled Menkooro whiskey. "Hold it!" Han snapped, gesturing with the blaster.

 He might as well have been talking to a hole in the air. The wraith continued on to his feet

 And with the only other option being to shoot him dead, Han lowered his aim and fired into the pool of whiskey. There was a gentlewhoosh ; and abruptly, the center of the room burst into blue-tinged flame.

 The alien leaped backward out of the fire, screaming something in his own language which Han was just as glad he couldn't understand. The wraith's momentum slammed him up against a stack of crates, nearly bringing the whole pile down. Han fired twice into the crate above the alien, starting twin waterfalls of alcohol cascading down around his shoulders and head. The alien screamed again, got his balance back

 And with one final shot, Han set the waterfalls on fire.

 The wraith's scream turned into a high-pitched wail as it twisted away from the blaze, its head and shoulders sheathed in flame. More in anger than pain, though, Han knewalcohol fires weren't all that hot. Given time, the wraith would slap out the fire, and then very likely break Han's neck.

 He wasn't given that time. Midway through the wail the storeroom's automatic fire system finally sputtered into action, the sensors directing streams of fire foam straight into the wraith's face.

 Han didn't wait to see the outcome. Ducking past the temporarily blinded alien, he slipped out the door.

 The corridor, which had been crowded with panicking people when he'd first been grabbed, was now deserted, the passengers on their way to the escape pods or the imagined safety of their staterooms. Firing a shot into the storeroom lock to seal it, Han hurried forward toward the ship's main hatchway. And hoped he'd get to Lando in time.

 

 From far below him, almost lost among the shouts and screams of frightened passengers, Lando could hear the muffled hum of activated pumps. Sooner than he'd expected, theCoral Vanda was surrendering.

 He swore under his breath, throwing another quick look over his shoulder. Where in blazes had Han gotten to, anyway? Probably hunting for Ferrier, wanting to see what the slippery ship thief was up to. Trust Han to run off and play a hunch when there was work to be done.

 A dozen of theCoral Vanda 's crewers were busy taking up defensive positions inside the ship's main hatchway as he arrived. "I need to talk to the captain or another officer right away," he called to them.

 "Get back to your room," one of the men snapped without looking at him. "We're about to be boarded."

 "I know," Lando said. "And I know what the Imperials want."

 That one rated him a quick look. "Yeah? What?"

 "One of your passengers," Lando told him. "He has something the Empire"

 "What's his name?"

 "I don't know. I've got a description, though."

 "Wonderful," the crewer grunted, checking the power level on his blaster. "Tell you what you doyou head aft and start going door to door. Let us know if you find him."

 Lando gritted his teeth. "I'm serious."

 "So am I," the other retorted. "Go on, get out of here."

 "But"

 "I said move it." He pointed his blaster at Lando. "If your passenger's got any sense he's probably already ejected in an escape pod, anyway."

 Lando backed away down the corridor, the whole thing belatedly falling together in his mind. No, the ship supplier wouldn't be in any escape pod. He probably wouldn't even be in his stateroom. Ferrier was here; and knowing Ferrier, he wouldn't have deliberately shown himself like that unless he'd already won the race.

 The deck rocked slightly beneath his feet: theCoral Vanda had reached the surface. Turning, Lando hurried aft again. There was a passenger-access computer terminal a couple of corridors back. If he could get a passenger list from it and find Ferrier's room, he might be able to get to them before the Imperials took control of the ship. Breaking into a quick jog, he turned into a cross corridor

 They were striding purposefully toward him: four large men with blasters at the ready, with a thin, whitehaired man almost hidden in the center of the group. The lead man spotted Lando, snapped his blaster up, and fired.

 The first shot was a clean miss. The second sizzled into the wall as Lando ducked back behind the corner.

 "So much for finding Ferrier's room," Lando muttered. Another handful of shots spit past his barricade; and then, surprisingly, the firing stopped. Blaster in hand, hugging the corridor wall, Lando eased back to the corner and threw a quick look around it.

 They were gone.

 "Great," he muttered, taking a longer look. They were gone, all right, probably into one of the crew-only areas that ran down the central core of the ship. Chasing after someone through an unfamiliar area was usually not a good idea, but there weren't a whole lot of other options available. Grimacing to himself, he started around the corner

 And yelped as a blaster bolt from his right scorched past his sleeve. He dived forward into the cross corridor, catching a glimpse as he fell of three more men coming toward him down the main corridor. He hit the thick carpet hard enough to see stars, rolled onto his side and yanked his legs out of the line of fire, fully aware that if any of the original group was watching from cover, he was dead. A barrage of blaster shots from the newcomers bit into the wall, with the kind of clustering that meant it was being used as cover fire while they advanced on him. Breathing hardthat crash dive had knocked the wind out of himLando got to his feet and started toward an arched doorway halfway down the cross corridor. It wouldn't give him much cover, but it was the best he had.

 He had just made it to the doorway when there was a sudden curse from the direction of his attackers, a handful of shots from what sounded like a different model blaster

 And then, silence.

 Lando frowned, wondering what they were pulling now. He could hear footsteps running toward him; flattening himself into the doorway as best he could, he leveled his blaster at the intersection.

 The footsteps came to the intersection and paused. "Lando?"

 Lando lowered his blaster with a silent sigh of relief. "Over here, Han," he called. "Come onFerrier's people have our man."

 Han rounded the corner and sprinted toward him. "That's not all, buddy," he panted. "Ferrier's gunning for you, too."

 Lando grimaced. He hadn't missed by much, either. "Never mind me," he said. "I think they must have gone down the ship's core. We've got to catch up with them before they reach the main hatchway."

 "We can try," Han said grimly, looking around. "Over therelooks like a crewer access door."

 It was. And it was locked.

 "Ferrier's people got in," Lando grunted, stooping down to examine the half-open release panel. "Yeah. Hereit's been hot-wired Let's see"

 He probed carefully into the mechanism with the tip of his little finger; and with a satisfyingclick , the panel unlocked and slid open. "There we go," he said. He got to his feet again

 And jumped back from the opening as a stuttering of blaster fire flashed through.

 "Yeah, there we go all right," Han said. He was against the wall on the other side of the opening, blaster ready but with no chance of getting a shot in through the rear guard's fire. "How many people has Ferrier got on this ship, anyway?"

 "A lot," Lando growled. The door, apparently deciding that no one was going through after all, slid shut again. "I guess we do this the hard way. Let's get back to the main hatchway and try to catch them there."

 Han grabbed his shoulder. "Too late," he said. "Listen."

 Lando frowned, straining his ears. Over the quiet hum of ship's noises, he could make out the rapid-fire spitting of stormtrooper laser rifles in the distance. "They're aboard," he murmured.

 "Yeah," Han nodded. The deck vibrated briefly beneath their feet, and abruptly the laser fire slackened off. "Subsonic grenade," he identified it. "That's it. Come on."

 "Come on where?" Lando asked as Han set off down the cross corridor.

 "Aft to the escape pod racks, the other said. "We're getting out of here."

 Lando felt his mouth drop open. But he looked at his friend, and his objections died unsaid. Han's face was set into tight lines, his eyes smoldering with anger and frustration. He knew what this meant, all right. Probably better than Lando did.

 

 The escape pod bobbed on the surface of the sea, surrounded by a hundred other pods and floating bits of reef. Through the tiny porthole Han watched as, in the distance, the last of the Imperial assault shuttles lifted from theCoral Vanda and headed back to space. "That's it, then?" Lando ventured from the seat behind him.

 "That's it," Han said, hearing the bitterness in his voice. "They'll probably start picking up the pods soon."

 "We did all we could, Han," Lando pointed out quietly. "And it could have been worse. They could have blown theCoral Vanda out of the waterit might have been days before anyone came to get us then."

 Which would have given the Empire that much more of a head start. "Oh, yeah, great," Han said sourly. "We're really on top of things."

 "What else could we have done?" Lando persisted. "Scuttled the ship to keep them from getting himnever mind that we'd have killed several hundred people in the process? Or maybe just gotten ourselves killed fighting three assault shuttles' worth of stormtroopers? At least this way Coruscant has a chance to get ready before ships from the Dark Force start showing up in battle."

 Lando was tryingyou had to give him that. But Han wasn't ready to be cheered up yet. "How do you get ready to get hit by two hundred Dreadnaughts?" he growled. "We're stretched to the limit as it is."

 "Come on, Han," Lando said, his voice starting to sound a little irritated. "Even if the ships are in mint condition and ready to fly, they're still going to need two thousand crewers apiece to man them. It'll be years before the Imperials can scrape that many recruits together and teach them how to fly the things."

 "Except that the Empire already had a call out for new ships," Han reminded him. "Means they already have a bunch of recruits ready to go."

 "I doubt they have four hundred thousand of them," Lando countered. "Come on, try looking on the bright side for once.

 "There's not much bright side here to look at." Han shook his head.

 "Sure there is," Lando insisted. "Thanks to your quick action, the New Republic still has a fighting chance."

 Han frowned at him. "What do you mean?"

 "You saved my life, remember? Shot those goons of Ferrier's off my back."

 "Yeah, I remember. What does that have to do with the New Republic's chances?"

 "Han!" Lando said, looking scandalized. "You know perfectly well how fast the New Republic would fall apart without me around."

 Han tried real hard, but he couldn't quite strangle off a smile on that one. He compromised, letting it come out twisted. "All right, I give up," he sighed. "If I stop grousing, will you shut up?"

 "Deal," Lando nodded.

 Han turned back to the porthole, the smile fading away. Lando could talk all he wanted; but the loss of theKatana fleet would be a first magnitude disaster, and they both knew it. Somehow, they had to stop the Empire from getting to those ships.

 Somehow.

 

 CHAPTER
26

 Mon Mothma shook her head in wonderment. "TheKatana fleet," she breathed. "After all these years. It's incredible."

 "Some might even put it more strongly than that," Fey'lya added coolly, his fur rippling as he gazed hard at Karrde's impassive face. He'd been doing a lot of that throughout the hastily called meeting, Leia had noticed: gazing hard at Karrde, at Luke, at Leia herself. Even Mon Mothma hadn't been left out. "Some might, in fact, have severe doubts that what you're telling us is true at all."

 Beside Karrde, Luke shifted in his seat, and Leia could sense his efforts to control his annoyance with the Bothan. But Karrde merely cocked an eyebrow. "Are you suggesting that I'm lying to you?"

 "What, a smuggler lie?" Fey'lya countered. "What a thought."

 "He's not lying," Han insisted, an edge to his voice. "The fleet's been found. I saw some of the ships."

 "Perhaps," Fey'lya said, dropping his eyes to the polished surface of the table. Of all those at the meeting, Han had so far been the only one to escape Fey'lya's posturing and his glare. For some reason, the Bothan seemed reluctant to even look at him. "Perhaps not. There are more Dreadnaught cruisers in the galaxy than just theKatana fleet."

 "I don't believe this," Luke spoke up at last, looking back and forth between Fey'lya and Mon Mothma. "TheKatana fleet's been found, the Empire's going after it, and we're sitting here arguing about it?"

 "Perhaps the problem is that you believe too much, or too easily," Fey'lya retorted, turning his gaze on Luke. "Solo tells us the Empire is holding someone who can lead them to these alleged ships. And yet Karrde has said only he knows their location."

 "And as I've mentioned at least once today," Karrde said tartly, "the assumption that no one else knew what we'd found was just that: an assumption. Captain Hoffner was a very astute man in his way, and I have no trouble believing that he might have pulled a copy of the coordinates for himself before I erased them."

 "I'm glad you have such faith in your former associate," Fey'lya said. "For myself I find it easier to believe that it is Captain Solo who is wrong." His fur rippled. "Or has been deliberately deceived."

 Beside her, Leia felt Han's mood darken. "You want to explain that, Councilor?" he demanded.

 "I think you were lied to," Fey'lya said bluntly, his eyes still not meeting Han's. "I think this contact of yourswho I notice you've been remarkably reluctant to identifytold you a story and dressed it up with false evidence. That piece of machinery you say Calrissian examined could have come from anywhere. And you yourself admitted that you were never actually aboard any of the ships."

 "What about that Imperial raid on theCoral Vanda ?" Han demanded. "They thought there was someone there worth grabbing."

 Fey'lya smiled thinly. "Or else they wanted us to believe that they did. Which they very well might if your unnamed contact is in fact working for them."

 Leia looked at Han. There was something there, beneath the surface. Some swirl of emotion she couldn't identify. "Han?" she asked quietly.

 "No," he said, his eyes still on Fey'lya. "He's not working for the Imperials."

 "So you say," Fey'lya sniffed. "You offer little proof of that."

 "All right, then," Karrde put in. "Let's assume for the moment that all of this is in fact a giant soap bubble. What would the Grand Admiral stand to gain from it?"

 Fey'lya's fur shifted in a gesture Leia decided was probably annoyance. Between her and Karrde they'd pretty well burst the Bothan's theory that Thrawn was not, in fact, an Imperial Grand Admiral; and Fey'lya wasn't taking even that minor defeat well. "I should think that was obvious," he told Karrde stiffly. "How many systems would we have to leave undefended, do you suppose, in order to reassign enough trained personnel to reactivate and transport two hundred Dreadnaughts? No, the Empire has a great deal to gain by hasty action on our part."

 "They also have a great deal to gain by our total lack of action," Karrde said, his voice icy cold. "I worked with Hoffner for over two years; and I can tell you right now that it won't take the Imperials a great deal of time to obtain the fleet's location from him. If you don't move quickly, you stand to lose everything."

 "If there's anything out there to lose," Fey'lya said.

 Leia put a warning hand on Han's arm. "That should be easy enough to check," she jumped in before Karrde could respond. "We can send a ship and tech crew out to take a look. If the fleet is there and seems operational, we can start a full-scale salvage effort."

 From the look on Karrde's' face she could tell that he thought even that was moving too slowly. But he nodded. "I suppose that's reasonable enough," he said.

 Leia looked at Mon Mothma. "Mon Mothma?"

 "I agree," the other said. "Councilor Fey'lya, you'll speak to Admiral Drayson at once about assigning an Escort Frigate and two X-wing squadrons to this mission. Preferably a ship already here at Coruscant; we don't want anyone outside the system to get even a hint of what we're doing."

 Fey'lya inclined his head slightly. "As you wish. Will tomorrow morning be sufficiently early?"

 "Yes." Mon Mothma looked at Karrde. "We'll need the fleet's coordinates."

 "Of course," Karrde agreed. "I'll supply them tomorrow morning."

 Fey'lya snorted. "Let me remind you, Captain Karrde"

 "Unless, of course, Councilor," Karrde continued smoothly, "you'd prefer I leave Coruscant tonight and offer the location to the highest bidder."

 Fey'lya glared at him, his fur flattening. But there was nothing he could do about it, and he knew it. "In the morning, then," he growled.

 "Good," Karrde nodded. "If that's all, then, I believe I'll return to my quarters and rest awhile before dinner."

 He looked across at Leia and suddenly, there was something different in his face or his sense. She nodded fractionally, and his gaze slid unconcernedly away from her as he stood up. "Mon Mothma; Councilor Fey'lya," he said, nodding to each in turn. "It's been interesting."

 "We'll see you in the morning," Fey'lya said darkly.

 A faintly sardonic smile touched Karrde's lips. "Of course.

 "Then I declare this meeting adjourned," Mon Mothma said, making it official.

 "Let's go," Leia murmured to Han as the others began collecting their data cards together.

 "What's going on?" he murmured back.

 "I think Karrde wants to talk," she told him. "Come onI don't want to get bogged down here talking to Mon Mothma."

 "Yeah, well, you go on," Han said, his voice oddly preoccupied.

 She frowned at him. "You sure?"

 "Yeah," he said. His eyes flicked over her shoulder, and she glanced around in time to see Fey'lya stride from the room. "Go on. I'll catch up with you."

 "All right," she said, frowning at him.

 "It's okay," he assured her, reaching down to squeeze her hand. "I just need to talk to Fey'lya for a minute."

 "What about?"

 "Personal stuff." He tried one of those lopsided smiles she usually found so endearing. It didn't look nearly so innocent this time as it normally did. "Heyit's okay," he repeated. "I'm just going to talk to him. Trust me.

 "I've heardthat before," Leia sighed. But Luke had already left the room, and Karrde was on his way out and Mon Mothma had that look about her that signified that she was about to come over and ask Leia for a favor. "Just try to be diplomatic, all right?"

 His eyes flicked over her shoulder again. "Sure," he said. "Trust me.

 

 Fey'lya was heading down the Grand Corridor toward the Assemblage chamber when Han caught sight of him, walking with that peculiar gait of someone who's in a terrific hurry but doesn't want anyone else to know it. "Hey!" Han called. "Councilor Fey'lya!"

 The only response was a brief flush of pale red across the nearest of the line of ch'hala trees. Glowering at the back of Fey'lya's head, Han lengthened his stride, and within a dozen quick paces had caught up with the other. "I'd like a word with you, Councilor," he said.

 Fey'lya didn't look at him. "We have nothing to discuss," he said.

 "Oh, I think we do," Han said, falling into step beside him. "Like maybe trying to find a way out of the jam you're in here."

 "I thought your female was the diplomat of the family," Fey'lya sniffed, throwing a sideways look at Han's shirtfront.

 "We take turns," Han told him, trying real hard not to dislike the other. "See, what got you into trouble here was trying to play politics by Bothan rules. That bank thing made Ackbar look bad, so like any good Bothan, you jumped on him. Trouble is, no one else jumped with you, so you were left there all alone with your neck stuck way out and your political reputation on the line. You don t know how to back out gracefully, and you figure the only way to salvage your prestige is to make sure Ackbar goes down."

 "Indeed?" Fey'lya said acidly. "Did it ever occur to you that I might have stuck my neck out, as you put it, because I truly believed Ackbar was guilty of treason?"

 "Not really, no," Han told him. "But a lot of other people think that, and that's what's got your reputation on the line. They can't imagine anyone making such a fuss without some proof."

 "What makes you think I haven't any proof?"

 "For starters, the fact that you haven't shown it," Han said bluntly. "Then there's the fact that you sent Breil'lya scrambling out to New Cov to try and make some sort of high-prestige deal with Senator Bel Iblis. Thatis what Breil'lya was doing out there, isn't it?"

 "I don't know what you're talking about," Fey'lya muttered.

 "Right. And that's the third thing: the fact that five minutes ago you were ready to throw Bel Iblis to the cravers if it would buy you enough time to bring in theKatana fleet."

 Abruptly, Fey'lya stopped. "Let me speak frankly with you, Captain Solo," he said, still not looking directly at Han's face. "Whether you understand my motivations or not, I certainly understand yours. You hope to bring theKatana fleet to Coruscant yourself; and with that leverage to force my downfall and Ackbar's reinstatement."

 "No," Han said tiredly, shaking his head. "That's the whole point, Councilor. Leia and the others don't play by Bothan rules. They make decisions based on evidence, not prestige. If Ackbar is guilty, he gets punished; if he's innocent, he gets released. It's that simple."

 Fey'lya smiled bitterly. "Take my advice, Captain Solo, and stick with smuggling and fighting and other things you understand. The private rules of politics are far beyond you."

 "You're making a mistake, Councilor," Han said, trying one last time. "You can back out now without losing anythingyou really can. But if you keep going, you risk bringing the whole New Republic down with you."

 Fey'lya drew himself up to his full height. "I do not intend to fall, Captain Solo. My supporters among the New Republic military will see to that. Ackbar will fall, and I will rise in his place. Excuse me, now; I must speak with Admiral Drayson."

 He turned and stalked off. Han watched him go, the sour taste of defeat in his mouth. Couldn't Fey'lya see what he was doing? That he was risking everything on a single long-shot bet?

 Maybe he couldn't. Maybe it took an experienced gambler to see how the odds were stacked here.

 Or a politician who wasn't so set in his own system that he couldn't change.

 Fey'lya reached the end of the Grand Corridor and headed to the left toward the Admiralty center. Shaking his head, Han turned and headed back toward Karrde's guest quarters. First theCoral Vanda , and now this. He hoped it wasn't the start of a trend.

 

 Mara stood at the window of her room, staring out at the Manarai Mountains in the distance, feeling the oppressive weight of black memories gathering around her mind. The Imperial Palace. After five years, she was back in the Imperial Palace. Scene of important governmental meetings, glittering social functions, dark and private intrigues. The place where her life had effectively begun.

 The place where she'd been when it had ended.

 Her fingernails grated across the carved swirls of the window frame as well-remembered faces rose before her: Grand Admiral Thrawn, Lord Vader, Grand Moff Tarkin, advisers and politicians and sycophants by the hundreds. But above them all was the image of the Emperor. She could see him in her mind's eye as clearly as if he were staring in at her through the window, his wrinkled face frowning, his yellow-tinged eyes bright with anger and disapproval.

 YOU WILL KILL LUKE SKYWALKER

 "I'm trying," she whispered to the words echoing through her mind. But even as she said it she wondered if it were really true. She'd helped save Skywalker's life on Myrkr; had come begging for his help on Jomark; and had now uncomplainingly come to Coruscant with him.

 She wasn't in any danger. Neither was Karrde. There was no way she could think of why Skywalker would be useful to either her or any of Karrde's people.

 She had, in short, no excuses left.

 From the next room over came the faint sound of a door opening and closing: Karrde, returned from his meeting. Turning from the window, glad of an excuse to drop this line of thought, she headed toward the door connecting their rooms.

 Karrde got there first. "Mara?" he said, opening the door and poking his head through. "Come in here, please."

 He was standing by the room's computer terminal when she arrived. One look at his face was all she needed. "What's gone wrong?" she asked.

 "I'm not entirely sure," he said, pulling a data card from the terminal's copy slot. "That Bothan on the Council put up a surprising amount of resistance to our offer. He basically forced Mon Mothma to hold off on any serious retrieval mission until the location's been checked out. He's getting a ship set up now for a morning flight."

 Mara frowned. "A double-cross?"

 "Possibly, but I can't see any point to it." Karrde shook his head. "Thrawn already has Hoffner. He'll get to the fleet soon enough. No, I think it more likely Fey'lya's playing internal politics here, perhaps connected to his campaign against Admiral Ackbar. But I'd rather not take any chances."

 "I've heard stories about internal Bothan politics," Mara agreed grimly. "What do you want me to do?"

 "I want you to leave tonight for the Trogon system," he said, handing her the data card. "Best guess is that's where Aves will have holed up. Make contact and tell him I want everything we have that can both fly and fight to rendezvous with me at theKatana fleet as soon as possible."

 Mara took the card gingerly, her fingers tingling at the touch of the cool plastic. There it was, in her hands: theKatana fleet. A lifetime's worth of wealth or power  "I may have trouble persuading Aves to trust me," she warned.

 "I don't think so," Karrde said. "The Imperials will have reinstated the hunt for our group by nowthat alone should convince him I've escaped. There's also a special recognition code on that data card that he'll know, a code the Grand Admiral couldn't possibly have extracted from me this quickly."

 "Let's hope he doesn't have a higher opinion of Imperial interrogation methods than you do," Mara said, sliding the data card into her tunic. "Anything else?"

 "Noyes," Karrde corrected himself. "Tell Ghent I'd like him to come to Coruscant instead of going to theKatana fleet. I'll meet him here after all this is over."

 "Ghent?" Mara frowned. "Why?"

 "I want to see what a really expert slicer can do with that suspicious lump in Ackbar's bank account. Skywalker mentioned a theory that the break-in and deposit happened at the same time, but he said that so far no one's been able to prove it. I'm betting Ghent can do so."

 "I thought this involvement in New Republic politics was supposed to be a one-shot deal," Mara objected.

 "It is," Karrde nodded. "I don't want to leave an ambitious Bothan at my back when we leave."

 "Point," she had to concede. "All right. You have a ship for me to use?"

 There was a tap at the door. "I will in a minute," Karrde said, crossing to the door and pulling it open.

 It was Skywalker's sister. "You wanted to see me?" she asked.

 "Yes," Karrde nodded in greeting. "I believe you know my associate, Mara Jade?"

 "We met briefly when you arrived on Coruscant," Organa Solo nodded. For a moment her eyes met Mara's, and Mara wondered uneasily how much Skywalker had told her.

 "I need Mara to go on an errand for me," Karrde said, glancing both directions down the corridor before closing the door. "She'll need a fast, long-range ship."

 "I can get her one," Organa Solo said. "Will a reconnaissance Y-wing do, Mara?"

 "That'll be fine," Mara said shortly.

 "I'll call the spaceport and make arrangements." She looked back at Karrde. "Anything else?"

 "Yes," Karrde said. "I want to know if you can throw together a tech team and get it into space tonight."

 "Councilor Fey'lya's already sending a team," she reminded him.

 "I know that. I want yours to get there first."

 She studied him a moment. "How big a team do you want?"

 "Nothing too elaborate," Karrde told her. "A small transport or freighter, perhaps a starfighter squadron if you can find one that doesn't mind risking official wrath. The point is not to have Fey'lya's presumablly handpicked crew the only ones there."

 Mara opened her mouth; closed it again without speaking. If Karrde wanted Organa Solo to know that his own people would also be coming, he would tell her himself. Karrde glanced at her, back at Organa Solo. "Can you do it?"

 "I think so," she said. "Fey'lya has built up a lot of support in the military, but there are enough people who would rather have Admiral Ackbar back in charge."

 "Here are the coordinates," Karrde said, handing her a data card. "The sooner you can get the team moving, the better."

 "It'll be gone in two hours," Organa Solo promised.

 "Good," Karrde nodded, his face hardening. "There's just one more thing, then. I want you to understand that there are exactly two reasons why I'm doing this. First, as gratitude to your brother for risking his life to help Mara rescue me; and second, to get the Imperials off my back by eliminating their chief reason to hunt me down. That's all. As far as your war and your internal politics are concerned, my organization intends to remain completely neutral. Is that clear?"

 Organa Solo nodded. "Very clear," she said.

 "Good. You'd better get moving, then. It's a long way to the fleet, and, you'll want as much head start on Fey'lya as you can get."

 "Agreed." Organa Solo looked at Mara. "Come on, Mara. Let's get you your ship."

 

 The comm beside Wedge Antilles' bunk buzzed its annoying call-up signal. Groaning under his breath, he groped in the darkness and slapped in the general direction of the switch. "Come on, give me a break, huh?" he pleaded. "I'm still running on Ando time."

 "It's Luke, Wedge," a familiar voice said. "Sorry to drag you out of bed, but I need a favor. You feel like maybe getting your people into some trouble?"

 "Whenaren't we in trouble?" Wedge countered, coming fully awake. "What's the deal?"

 "Get your pilots together and meet me at the spaceport in an hour," Luke told him. "Docking Pad 15. We've got an old transport; we should be able to fit all your X-wings aboard."

 "It's a long trip, then?"

 "A few days," Luke said. "I can't tell you any more than that right now."

 "You're the boss," Wedge said. "We'll be there in one hour."

 "See you then. And thanks."

 Wedge keyed off and rolled out of bed, feeling a stirring of old excitement. He'd seen a lot of action in the decade he'd been with the Rebellion and New Republic; a lot of flying, a lot of fighting. But somehow, the missions he remembered as being the most interesting always seemed to be the ones where Luke Skywalker was also involved. He wasn't sure why; maybe Jedi just had a knack for that.

 He hoped so. Between politics on Coruscant and cleaning up after Imperial raids across the New Republic, things were getting more and more frustrating around here. A change would do him good.

 Keying on the light, he pulled a fresh tunic out of his wardrobe and started getting dressed.

 

 There was no problem getting the midnight transport off Coruscant; Leia's authorization guaranteed that. But a freighter with a cargo consisting of a dozen X-wings was unusual enough to spark comment and speculation and it was inevitable that the speculation would eventually reach the ears of one of Fey'lya's supporters.

 By morning, he knew everything.

 "This goes well beyond internal political infighting," he snarled at Leia, his fur rippling back and forth like short stalks of grain caught in a succession of dust devils. "It was blatantly illegal. If not treasonous."

 "I'm not sure I'd go quitethat far," Mon Mothma said. But she looked troubled. "Why did you do it, Leia?"

 "She did it because I asked her to," Karrde put in calmly. "And since theKatana fleet is technically not yet under New Republic jurisdiction, I don't see, how any activity related to it can be considered illegal."

 "We'll explain proper legal procedure to you later, smuggler," Fey'lya said acidly. "Right now, we have a serious breach of security to deal with. Mon Mothma, I request an executive order be made out for Solo's and Skywalker's arrest."

 Even Mon Mothma seemed taken aback by that one. "An arrest order?"

 "They know where theKatana fleet is," Fey'lya bit out. "None of their group has been cleared for that information. They must be sequestered until the fleet has been entirely brought into New Republic possession.

 "I hardly think that will be necessary," Leia said, throwing a look at Karrde. "Han and Luke have both handled classified information in the past"

 "This is not the past," Fey'lya interrupted her. "This is the present; and they have not been cleared." His fir flattened. "Under the circumstances, I think I Lad best take personal charge of this mission.

 Leia threw a look at Karrde, saw her own thought reflected in his face. If Fey'lya was able to personally bring back theKatana fleet "You're certainly welcome to come along, Councilor," Karrde told the Bothan. "Councilor Organa Solo and I will appreciate your company."

 It took a second for that to register. "What are you talking about?" Fey'lya demanded. "No one's authorized either of you to come along."

 "I'm authorizing it, Councilor," Karrde said coldly. "TheKatana fleet is still mine, and will remain so until the New Republic takes possession of it. Until then, I make the rules."

 Fey'lya's fur flattened again, and for a moment Leia thought the Bothan was going to launch himself physically at Karrde's throat. "We will not forget, this, smuggler," he hissed instead. "Your time will come."

 Karrde smiled sardonically. "Perhaps. Shall we go?"

 

 CHAPTER
27

 The proximity alert warbled, and Luke straightened up in his seat. After five days, they'd made it. "here we go," he said. "You ready?"

 "You know me, Han said from the pilot's seat beside him. "I'm always ready."

 Luke threw a sideways glance at his friend. To all outward appearances, Han seemed perfectly normal, or at least as close to it as he ever got. But beneath the casual flippancy Luke had noticed something else over the past few days: a darker, almost brooding sense that had been with him since they left Coruscant. It was there now; and as he studied Han's face, Luke could see the tension lines there. "You all right?" he asked quietly.

 "Oh, sure. Fine." The lines tightened a little further. "But just once I'd like them to find someone else to go off on these little jaunts across the galaxy. You know Leia and I didn't even get a day together? We didn't see each other for a whole month; and we didn't even get a day."

 Luke sighed. "I know," he said. "Sometimes I feel like I've been running full speed since we blasted out of Tatooine with the droids and Ben Kenobi way lack when."

 Han shook his head. "I hadn't seen her for a month," he repeated. "She looks twice as pregnant as she did when she left. I don't even know what happened to her and Chewie out thereall she had time to tell me was that those Noghri things are on our side now. Whateverthat means. I can't get anything out of Chewie, either. Says it's her story, and that she should tell it herself. I'm about ready to strangle him."

 Luke shrugged. "You have to face it, Han. We're just too good at what we do."

 Han snorted. But some of the tension left his face. "Yeah. Right."

 "More to the point, I guess, we're on the list of people Leia knows she can trust," Luke continued more seriously. "Until we find that information tap the Empire's got into the Imperial Palace, that list is going to stay pretty short."

 "Yeah." Han grimaced. "Someone told me the Imperials call it Delta Sourse. You got any ideas who or what it might be?"

 Luke shook his head. "Not really. Got to be close in to the Assemblage, though. Maybe even to the Council. One thing's for surewe'd better get busy and find it."

 "Yeah." Han stirred and reached for the hyperdrive levers. "Get ready "

 He pulled the levers; and a moment later they were again in the blackness of deep space. "Here we are," Han announced.

 "Right." Luke looked around, an involuntary shiver running up his back. "Dead center in the middle of nowhere."

 "Should be a familiar feeling for you," Han suggested, keying for a sensor scan.

 "Thanks," Luke said, "but getting stuck between systems with a d,e,ad hyperdrive isn't something I want to get familiar with."

 "I didn't mean that," Han said innocently as he keyed the comm. "I was talking about Tatooine. Wedge?"

 "Right here," the other's voice came over the "Looks like we've got a target at oh-four-seven mark one-six-six," Han told him. "You ready to fly?"

 "Ready and eager."

 "Okay." Han took a last look out the viewport and keyed the cargo hatch release. "Go."

 Luke craned his neck to look in the direction Han had indicated. At first all he could see was the normal scattering of stars, achingly bright against the total blackness around them. And then he saw them: the softer glow of a ship's running lights. His eyes traced the empty space between them, his brain forcing a pattern to the lights; and suddenly the image coalesced. "It's a Dreadnaught, all right."

 "There's another one just past it," Han said. "And three more to port and a little below."

 Luke nodded as he located them, a strange tingle running through him. TheKatana fleet. Only now did he realize just how little he'd really believed in the fleet's existence. "Which one do we check out?" he asked.

 "Might as well take the closest," Han said.

 "No," Luke said slowly, trying to focus on the vague impression tingling through him. "No. Let's trythat one over there." He pointed to a set of running lights a few kilometers farther away.

 "Any particular reason?"

 "I don't really know," Luke had to admit.

 He could feel Han's eyes on him. Then the other shrugged. "Okay," he said. "Sure. We'll take that one. Wedge, you getting all this?"

 "Copy, transport," Wedge's voice confirmed. "We're shifting into escort formation around you. So far it looks clean."

 "Good," Han said. "Stay sharp anyway." He keyed the transport's intercom into the circuit and glanced at his chrono. "Lando? Where are you?"

 "Just inside the cargo hatch," the other answered. "We've got the sled loaded and ready to go.

 "Okay," Han said. "We're heading in."

 They were approaching their target Dreadnaught now, close enough that Luke could see the faint outline of reflected starlight that marked the edge of the hull. Roughly cylindrical in shape, with a half dozen weapons blisters arranged around its midsection and a bow that he'd heard once described as a giant clam with an overbite, the ship looked almost quaintly archaic. But it was a false impression. The Dreadnaught Heavy Cruiser had been the backbone of the Old Republic's fleet; and while it might not look as sleek as the Imperial Star Destroyer that had replaced it, its massive turbolaser batteries still packed an awesome punch. "How do we get aboard?" he asked Han.

 "There's the main docking bay," Han said, pointing to a dim rectangle of lights. "We'll take the ship inside."

 Luke looked at the rectangle doubtfully. "If it's big enough."

 His fears proved groundless. The entrance to the docking bay was larger than it had appeared, and the bay itself even more so. With casual skill Han brought the transport in, swiveled it around to face the opening, and put it down on the deck. "Okay," he said, keying the systems to standby and unstrapping. "Let's get this over with."

 Lando, Chewbacca, and the four-man tech team were waiting at the cargo hatchway when Han and Luke arrived, the techs looking somewhat ill at ease with the unaccustomed blasters belted awkwardly to their sides. "Checked the air yet, Anselm?" Han asked.

 "It looks fine," the head of the tech team reported, offering Han a data pad for inspection. "Better than it should be after all these years. Must still be some droids on housekeeping duty."

 Han glanced at the analysis, handed back the data pad, and nodded to Chewbacca. "Okay, Chewie, open the hatch. Tomrus, you drive the sled. Watch out for blank spots in the gravity plateswe don't want you bouncing the sled off the ceiling."

 The air in the bay had a strangely musty odor about it; a combination of oil and dust, Luke decided, with a slight metallic tang. But it was fresh enough otherwise. "Pretty impressive," he commented as the group walked behind the repulsorlift sled toward the main hatchway. "Especially after all this time."

 "Those full-rig computer systems were designed to last," Lando said. "So what's the plan, Han?"

 "I guess we split up," Han said. "You and Chewie take Anselm, Tomrus, and the sled and go check out engineering. We'll head up to the bridge."

 For Luke, it was one of the eeriest trips of his life, precisely because it all looked so normal. The lights in the wide corridors were all working properly, as were the gravity plates and the rest of the environment system. Doors leading off the corridor slid open automatically whenever any of the group strayed close enough to trigger them, revealing glimpses of perfectly maintained machine shops, equipment rooms, and crew lounges. The faint mechanical noises of idling systems whispered behind the sound of their own footsteps, and occasionally they glimpsed an ancient droid still going about its business. To all appearances, the ship might just as well have been abandoned yesterday.

 But it hadn't been. The ships had been floating here in the blackness for half a century and their crews had not left, but had died here in agony and madness. Looking down empty cross corridors as they walked, Luke wondered what the maintenance droids had made of it all as they cleared away the bodies.

 The bridge was a long walk from the docking bay. But eventually they made it. "Okay, we're here," Han announced into his comlink as the blast doors between the bridge and the monitor anteroom behind it opened with only minor grating sounds. "Doesn't seem to be any obvious damage. What have you got on the sublight engines?"

 "Doesn't look good," Lando reported. "Tomrus says that six of the eight main power converters have been knocked out of alignment. He's still running a check, but my guess is this tub's not going anywhere without a complete overhaul."

 "Ask me if I'm surprised," Han countered dryly. "What about the hyperdrive? Any chance we can at least fly it somewhere in towing range of a shipyard?"

 "Anselm is looking into that," Lando said. "Personally, I wouldn't trust it that far."

 "Yeah. Well, we're just here to look the thing over, not get it moving. We'll see what kind of control systems we've got left up here and that'll be it."

 Luke glanced up at the space over the blast doors. Paused for a second look at the elaborate name plaque fastened there. "It's theKatana ," he murmured.

 "What?" Han craned his neck for a look. "Huh." He looked oddly at Luke. "Was that why you wanted this one?"

 Luke shook his head. "I guess so. It was just intuition through the Force."

 "Han, Luke," Wedge's voice cut in suddenly. "We've got incoming."

 Luke felt his heart jump. "Where?"

 "Vector two-ten mark twenty-one. Configuration it's an Escort Frigate."

 Luke let out a quiet breath. "Better give them a call," he said. "Let them know where we are.

 "Actually, they're calling us," Wedge said. "Hang on; I'll patch it through."

 "tain Solo, this is Captain Virgilio of the Escort FrigateQuenfis ," a new voice came over Han's comlink. "Do you read?"

 "Solo here," Han said. "Calling from aboard the Old Republic shipKatana "

 "Captain Solo, I regret to inform you that you and your party are under arrest," Virgilio cut him off. "You will return to your own vessel at once and prepare to surrender."

 

 Virgilio's words, and the stunned silence that followed, echoed through the command observation deck above and behind theQuenfis 's bridge. Seated at the main board, Fey'lya threw a mocking smile at Leia, a slightly less insolent one at Karrde, then returned his attention to the distant X-wing drive trails. "They don't seem to be taking you seriously, Captain," he said toward the intercom. "Perhaps lauching your X-wing squadrons would convince them we're serious."

 "Yes, Councilor," Virgilio said briskly, and Leia strained her ears in vain for any signs of resentment in that voice. Most of the warship captains she'd known would be highly annoyed at the prospect of taking line orders from a civilian, particularly a civilian with negligible military experience of his own. But then, Fey'lya would hardly have picked theQuenfis for this mission if Virgilio hadn't been one of his staunchest backers. Just one more indication, if she'd needed it, as to who was really in charge here. "X-wings: launch."

 There were a series of dull thuds as the two squadrons of starfighters left the ship. "Captain Solo, this is Captain Virgilio. Please respond."

 "Captain, this is Wing Commander Wedge Antilles of Rogue Squadron," Wedge's voice cut in. "May I ask your authorization to order our arrest?"

 "Allow me, Captain," Fey'lya said, touching the comm switch on the board behind him. "This is Councilor Borsk Fey'lya, Commander Antilles," he said. "Though I doubt you're aware of it, Captain Solo is operating illegally."

 "I'm sorry, Councilor," Wedge said, "but I don't understand how that can be. Our orders came from Councilor Leia Organa Solo."

 "And these new orders come directly from Mon Mothma," Fey'lya told him. "Therefore, your authorization is"

 "Can you prove that?"

 Fey'lya seemed taken aback. "I have the order sitting here in front of me, Commander," he said. "You're welcome to examine it once you're aboard."

 "Commander, for the moment the origin of the arrest order is irrelevant," Virgilio put in, annoyance starting to creep into his voice. "As a superior officer,I order you to surrender and bring your squadron aboard my ship."

 There was a long silence. Leia threw a look at Karrde, seated a quarter of the way around the observation deck from her. But his attention was turned outward through the transparisteel bubble, his face impassive. Perhaps he was remembering the last time he'd been to this spot. "What if I refuse?" Wedge asked at last.

 "Forget it, Wedge," Han's voice cut in. "It's not worth risking a court martial over. Go on, we don't need you anymore. Nice hearing from you, Fey'lya." There was the faint click of a disconnecting comlink

 "Solo!" Fey'lya barked, leaning over the comm as if that would do any good. "Solo!" He turned and glared at Leia. "Get over here," he ordered her, jabbing a finger at the comm. "I want him back."

 Leia shook her head. "Sorry, Councilor. Han won't listen to anyone when he's like this."

 Fey'lya's fur flattened. "I'll ask you one more time, Councilor. If you refuse"

 He never had a chance to finish the threat. Something flickered at the edge of Leia's peripheral vision; and even as she turned to look, theQuenfis 's alarms went off. "What?" Fey'lya yelped, jerking in his seat and looking frantically around him.

 "It's an Imperial Star Destroyer," Karrde told him over the blaring of the alarms. "And it appears to be coming this way.

 

 "We got company, Rogue Leader," one of Wedge's X-wing pilots snapped as the sound of theQuenfis 's alarms came hooting over the comm. "Star Destroyer; bearing one-seven-eight mark eighty-six."

 "Got it," Wedge said, turning his ship away from its confrontation with theQuenfis 's approaching starfighters and bringing it around in a tight one-eighty. It was a Star Destroyer, all right: almost straight across from theQuenfis , with theKatana dead center between them. "Luke?" he called.

 "We see it," Luke's voice came back tightly. "We're heading for the docking bay now.

 "Righthold it," Wedge interrupted himself. Against the dark bulk of the Star Destroyer's lower hull a large group of drive trails had suddenly appeared. "They're launching," he told the other. "Twelve marksdrop ships, probably, from the look of the drive trails.

 "So we hurry," Han's voice came on. "Thanks for the warning; now get back to theQuenfis ."

 The comlink clicked and went dead. "Like blazes we will," Wedge muttered under his breath. "Rogue Squadron: let's go."

 Captain Virgilio was trying to say something on the open channel. Switching to his squadron's private frequency, Wedge kicked the X-wing's drive to full power and set off toward theKatana .

 

 In the near distance, just beyond the drive trails of theQuenfis 's X-wings, Rogue Squadron turned and blazed off in the direction of the Star Destroyer. "They're going to attack," Fey'lya breathed. "They must be insane."

 "They're not attackingthey're running cover," Leia told him, staring at the scenario unfolding outside the bubble and trying to estimate interception points. It was going to be far too close. "We need to get over there and back them up," she said. "Captain Virgilio"

 "Captain Virgilio, you'll recall your X-wings at once," Fey'lya cut her off. "Navigation will prepare to make the jump to lightspeed."

 "Councilor?" Virgilio asked, his voice sounding stunned. "Are you suggesting we abandon them?"

 "Our duty, Captain, is to get out of here alive and sound the alarm," Fey'lya countered sharply. "If Rogue Squadron insists on defying orders, there's nothing we can do for them."

 Leia was on her feet. "Captain"

 Fey'lya was quicker, slapping off the intercom before she could speak. "I'm in charge here, Councilor," he said as she started toward him. "Authorized by Mon Mothma herself."

 "To blazes with your authority," Leia snapped. For a handful of heartbeats she had the almost overwhelming urge to snatch her lightsaber from her belt and send it slicing through that bland face

 With an effort, she choked the urge down. Violent hatred was the path of the dark side. "Mon Mothma didn't anticipate anything like this happening," she said, fighting to keep her voice as calm as she could. "Fey'lya, that's my husband and my brother out there. If we don't help them, they'll die.

 "And if wedo help them, they'll most likely still die," Fey'lya said coolly. "And your unborn children along with them."

 An icy knife jabbed at Leia's heart. "That's not fair," she whispered.

 "Reality is not required to be fair," Fey'lya said. "And the reality in this case is that I will not waste men and ships on a lost cause."

 "It's not lost!" Leia insisted, her voice breaking with desperation as she threw a look out the bubble. No; it couldn't end like this. Not after all she and Han had survived together. She took another step toward Fey'lya

 "TheQuenfis will withdraw," the Bothan said quietly; and suddenly, from some hiding place within the cream-colored fur, a blaster appeared in his hand. "And neither you nor anyone else is going to change that."

 

 "Report from sensors, Captain," the officer at theJudicator 's scan station called up to the command walkway. "All the other Dreadnaughts in the region read negative for life-forms."

 "So they're concentrating on just the one," Captain Brandei nodded. "That's where we'll hit, then. The Rebels will be in far less of a hurry to open fire on a ship that has their own people aboard. Still just the one starfighter squadron moving to intercept?"

 "Yes, sir. The Escort Frigate and other two squadrons haven't yet responded. They must have been caught off guard."

 "Perhaps." Brandei permitted himself a slight smile. So it always went with rebels. They fought like crazed animals when they had nothing to lose; but give them a taste of victory and a chance to enjoy the spoils of war and suddenly they weren't nearly so eager to risk their lives anymore. One of many reasons why the Empire would ultimately defeat them. "Order the drop ships into defense formation," he instructed the communications officer. "And have Starfighter Command launch two squadrons of TIE fighters to intercept those X-wings."

 He smiled again. "And send a message to the,Chimaera . Inform the Grand Admiral that we have engaged the enemy."

 

 For a long minute Han gazed out the bridge observation bubble at the approaching Imperial ships, doing a quick estimate of times and distances and ignoring the fidgeting tech men waiting nervously at the bridge doorway. "Shouldn't we be going?" Luke prompted from beside him.

 Han came to a decision. "We're not leaving," he said, thumbing on his comlink. "We'd get the transport out of the docking bay just in time to run into those drop ships and TIE fighters. Lando?"

 "Right here," Lando's voice came tensely back.

 "What's happening out there?"

 "Imperials on the way," Han told him, moving over to the bridge fire-control panel and gesturing the techs to join him. "Rogue Squadron's moving to intercept, but it sounds like Fey'lya's crowd is going to run for it."

 Lando swore under his breath. "We can't just sit here and let Wedge tackle them alone."

 "We're not going to," Han assured him grimly. "Get busy back there and see what shape the power coupling to the turbolaser batteries is in. We'll check the fire control up here. And make it fastonce they break formation we won't be able to hit them."

 "Right."

 Han stuck the comlink back in his belt. "How's it look, Shen?"

 "Looks pretty solid," the tech's muffled voice came from underneath the control board. "Kline?"

 "Connections look good here, too," the other tech reported from a board across the room. "If we can get the computer to enable the system  there we go." He looked at Han. "You're all set."

 Han sat down at the weapons panel, running his eyes over the unfamiliar arrangement of the controls and wondering if all this effort was more than just spitting in vacuum. Even these full-rigged, computer-centralized, slave-circuit-equipped Dreadnaughts still required over two thousand people to fly them.

 But the Imperials wouldn't be expecting a derelict ship to fire. He hoped. "Here we go," he muttered to himself as he keyed for visual targeting. The drop ships were still flying in tight formation, using their overlapping shields to protect them from any loose shots from the approaching X-wings. The faster TIE fighters had caught up with them now, sweeping around the group on all sides and starting to pass them.

 "You've got just one shot at this," Luke murmured.

 "Thanks," Han growled. "I really needed to hear that." He took a deep breath, held it, and gently squeezed the fire control triggers.

 TheKatana lurched, and as the multiple blazes of turbolaser light flashed outward he felt the double thud of a disintegrating capacitor bank through the deck. Luke had been rightthe ship's first shot had been its last. But it had been worth it. The laser bolts hit the drop ship formation dead center; and suddenly the whole Imperial force seemed to come apart in a blaze of multiple explosions. For a few seconds everything was hidden behind secondary explosions and clouds of debris. Then, through the destruction, a handful of ships shot out. A few more joined them, this group moving with the distinctive limp of damaged property.

 "Looks like you took out five of the drop ships," Kline reported, peering through a set of macrobinoculars pressed tightly against his face. "A few of the TIE fighters, too.

 "They're going into evasive maneuvers," Luke added.

 "Okay," Han said, getting up from the chair and pulling out his comlink. "That's it for that game. Lando?"

 "Whatever you just did, it made a real mess back here," the other's voice came back. "Took out the firecontrol power coupling and at least one of the generators. What now?"

 "We get ready for a boarding party," Han told him. "Meet us in the portside main corridor just forward of the docking bay. We'll see what kind of defense we can set up."

 "Right."

 Han shut down the comlink. "Let's go," he said.

 "This had better be some defense," Luke commented as they left the bridge and headed back down the portside corridor. "Especially when we're talking maybe forty-to-one odds."

 Han shook his head. "Never tell me the odds," he admonished the other, glancing at his chrono. It could be any time now. "Besides, you never know when the odds are going to change."

 

 "We can't just abandon them," Leia said again, dimly aware that she was talking to Fey'lya as if he were a child. "That's my husband and brother out there, and a dozen good X-wing pilots. We can't just leave them to the Imperials."

 "One mustn't place personal considerations above one's duty to the New Republic, Councilor," Fey'lya said. His fur rippled, perhaps with appreciation of his own insight. But the blaster in his hand remained steady. "Surely you understand that."

 "It's not just personal considerations," Leia insisted, fighting hard to keep from losing her temper again. "It's"

 "One moment," Fey'lya interrupted her, touching the intercom switch. "Captain? How soon to lightspeed?"

 "Another minute," Virgilio's voice came back. "Perhaps two."

 "As quickly as you can, Captain," Fey'lya said. He shut the intercom off again and looked back at Leia. "You were saying, Councilor?"

 Leia consciously unclenched her teeth. If Fey'lya's aim would only shifteven a littleshe might be able to risk jumping him. But as matters stood, she was helpless. Her rudimentary abilities with the Force weren't nearly strong enough for her to grab or deflect the blaster, and he was nearly a meter out of reach of her lightsaber. "Han and Luke are vitally important to the New Republic," she said. "If they die or are captured"

 "TheKatana 's firing," Karrde commented calmly, getting to his feet as if for a better view.

 Leia glanced out the bubble as the distant Imperial ships were engulfed briefly in flame. "They know a great deal about the workings of the New Republic, Fey'lya. Do you want the Empire to get that knowledge?"

 "I'm afraid you're missing the Councilor's point, Leia," Karrde said, walking over to where she sat. He passed in front of her, dropping a data pad casually onto the tracking console beside her as he did so. "You're concerned about your family, of course," he continued, walking on a couple of paces before turning to face Fey'lya. "Councilor Fey'lya has a different set of priorities."

 "I'm sure he does," Leia said, her mouth suddenly dry as she looked sideways at the data pad Karrde had set down. On its screen was a short message.

 Turn on the intercom and conn.

 She looked up again. Fey'lya's blaster was still pointed at her, but the Bothan's violet eyes were turned toward Karrde. Setting her teeth, Leia focused on the board behind him and reached out with the Force  and without even a click the intercom was on. Another effort and the comm was, too. "I don't understand," she said to Karrde. "What other priorities could Councilor Fey'lya have?"

 "It's simple enough," Karrde said. "Councilor Fey'lya is motivated solely by his own political survival. He's running away from the fight because he's put his most ardent supporters aboard this ship and he can't afford to lose any of them."

 Leia blinked. "He's what? But I thought"

 "That this was the normal crew of theQuenfis ?"

 Karrde shook his head. "Not at all. The captain and senior officers are all that remain, and they were mostly on his side in the first place. That's why Fey'lya wanted a few hours before leaving Coruscant: so that he could shift duty assignments around and make sure everyone aboard was fully loyal to him." He smiled thinly. "Not that any of them realized that, of course. They were given the impression that it was a special security arrangement."

 Leia nodded, feeling cold all over. So it wasn't just the captain. The entire ship was on Fey'lya's side.

 Which meant it was over, and she had lost. Even if she was somehow able to take out Fey'lya himself she had lost.

 "So you can imagine," Karrde went on off handedly, "how reluctant Fey'lya is to risk losing any of them over anything so outmoded as loyalty to one's comrades. Especially after having worked so hard to convince them of how much he cared for the average fighting man."

 Leia threw Karrde a sharp look, suddenly seeing where he was going with this. "Is that true, Councilor?" she asked Fey'lya, putting disbelief in her voice. "All this talk about being on the side of the military was nothing more than a play for political power?"

 "Don't be foolish, Councilor," Fey'lya said, fur rippling with contempt. "What other use are soldiers to a politician?"

 "Is that why you don't care if the men of Rogue Squadron die?" Karrde asked. "Because they prefer to stay out of politics?"

 "No one cares if their enemies die," Fey'lya said coldly. "And all those who are not on my side are my enemies. He gestured with his bllaster. "I trust, Captain Karrde, that I need not say more."

 Karrde raised his eyes from Fey'lya to the view outside. "No, Councilor." he said. "I believe you've said enough."

 Leia followed his gaze. Between theQuenfis and theKatana , in twos and threes, Fey'lya's X-wing squadrons were heading to Wedge's support. Deserting the politician who had just defined the limits of his consideration for their welfare. "Yes," she murmered. "You've said enough."

 Fey'lya frowned at her; but even as he started to speak the door to the bridge slid open. Captain Virgilio stood there, flanked by two soldiers. "Councilor Fey'lya," he said stiffly. "I respectfully request you return to your quarters. These men will accompany you."

 Fey'lya's fur flattened. "I don't understand, Captain."

 "We're closing off this room, sir," Virgilio said, his voice respectful but with an edge. Stepping over to the Bothan's seat, he leaned toward the intercom. "This is the captain," he called. "All hands to battle stations."

 The alarm, promptly went off and in Fey'lya's eyes Leia could see the sudden shock of understanding. "Captain"

 "You see, Councilor, some of us don't consider loyalty to be all that outmoded," Virgilio cut him, turning turning to Leia. "Councilor Organa Solo, I'd like you to join me on the bridge at your convenience. We've called for a Star Cruiser to back us up, but it'll take awhile to get here."

 "We'll just have to hold them until then," Leia said, standing up. She looked at Karrde. "Thank you," she said quietly.

 "Not for you or your war," Karrde warned her. "Mara and my people could be arriving at any time. I'd just as soon they not be facing a Star Destroyer alone."

 "They won't," Virgilio said. "Councilor?"

 "It's a lost cause," Fey'lya said, trying one last time as he surrendered his blaster to one of the soldiers.

 "That's all right," Virgilio said, smiling tightly. "The whole Rebellion was considered nothing more than a lost cause. Excuse me, Councilor: I have a battle to run."

 

 TheChimaera was touring the region Pellaeon had privately dubbed the Depot when the report from the aJudicatorcame in. "Interesting," Thrawn commented. "They've responded faster than I'd expected."

 "Karrde must have decided to be generous," Pellaeon said, skimming the follow-up report. Five drop ships and three TIE fighters destroyed; one of the Dreadnaughts apparently under Rebellion control and joining battle. It looked like a major scrap was shaping up out there. "I recommend we send another Star Destroyer to assist, Admiral," he said. "The Rebellion may have larger ships on the way."

 "We'll go ourselves, Captain," Thrawn said. "Navigation: set us a course back to theKatana fleet."

 The navigation officer didn't move. He sat at his station, his back to them, unnaturally stiff. "Navigation?" Thrawn repeated.

 "Admiral, message coming through from the sentry line," the comm officer reported suddenly. "UnidentifiedLancer -class Frigate has entered the system and is approaching. They insist on speaking with you, personally and immediately."

 Thrawn's glowing eyes narrowed as he tapped the comm switch and suddenly Pellaeon realized who it must be aboard that ship. "This is Thrawn," the Grand Admiral said. "Master C'baoth, I presume?"

 "You presume correctly," C'baoth's voice boomed from the speaker. "I would speak with you, Grand Admiral. Now."

 "We're on our way to assist the aJudicator," Thrawn said, his eyes flicking to the still-motionless nav officer. "As you perhaps already know. When we return"

 "Now, Grand Admiral."

 Moving quietly in the brittle silence, Pellaeon keyed for a course projection on C'baoth's ship. "It'll take at least fifteen minutes to bring him aboard," he murmured.

 Thrawn hissed softly between his teeth; and Pellaeon knew what he was thinking. In the fluid situation of a spontaneous battle, a fifteen-minute delay could easily be the difference between victory and defeat. "Captain, order thePeremptory to assist theJudicator ," the Grand Admiral said at last. "We'll remain here to consult our ally."

 "Thank you, Grand Admiral," C'baoth said; and abruptly, the nav officer gasped and slumped in his chair. "I appreciate your generosity."

 Thrawn reached to his board, and with a vicious flick of his wrist cut off the comm. He looked down into the crew pit and motioned to two bridge guards. "Sick bay," he told them, indicating the now-shivering nav officer.

 "Where do you suppose C'baoth found thatLancer ?" Pellaeon murmured as the guards helped the nav officer out of his seat and carried him aft.

 "He most likely hijacked it," Thrawn said, his voice tight. "He's been sending messages for us over distances of several light-years, and he certainly knows how to take control of people. Apparently, he's learned how to meld the two abilities."

 Pellaeon looked down into the crew pit, a shiver running up his back. "I'm not sure I like that sir."

 "I don't much like it myself, Captain," Thrawn agreed, turning his head to look out the viewport. "It may be time," he added thoughtfully, "to reconsider our arrangement with Master C'baoth. To reconsider it very carefully."

 

 CHAPTER
28

 TheKatana 's turbolasers flashed, disintegrating the center of the Imperials' drop ship formation, and one of Wedge's X-wing pilots gave a war whoop. "Will you look at that?"

 "Cut the chatter, Rogue Seven," Wedge admonished, trying to see through the cloud of flaming debris. The Imperials had gotten a bloody nose, but that was about all. "They've got lots more TIE fighters in reserve.

 "Wedge?"

 Wedge switched channels. "I'm here, Luke."

 "We've decided not to leave the ship," Luke said. "We'd run right into the Imperials, and you know how well transports fight. You might as well get your group out of here and go whistle up some help."

 The surviving drop ships, Wedge saw, were reconfiguring into an evasion pattern with the TIE fighters moving ahead to clear a path for them. "You'll never be able to hold out," he told Luke flatly. "There could be three hundred troops aboard those drop ships."

 "We'll have a better chance against them than you will against a Star Destroyer," Luke retorted. "Come on, get going."

 Wedge clenched his teeth. Luke was right, and they both knew it. But to abandon his friends here

 "Rogue Leader, this is Gold Leader," a new voice abruptly came on the comm. Requesting permission to join the party."

 Frowning, Wedge threw a glance out the back of his canopy. They were there, all right: theQuenfis 's two X-wing squadrons, coming up behind his group for all they were worth. "Permission granted," he said. "I didn't think Councilor Fey'lya was going to let you come out and play."

 "Fey'lya doesn't have any say in it anymore, the other said grimly. "Tell you about it later. Captain's turned things over to Organa Solo."

 "First good news I've heard today," Wedge grunted. "All right, here's the scheme. You detail four of your group to hit those drop ships; the rest of us will concentrate on the TIE fighters. With luck, we can clear them out before the next wave gets here. I don't suppose we've gut any backup of our own coming?"

 "Captain says there's a Star Cruiser on the way, Gold Leader said. "Don't know when it'll get here, though."

 Probably not soon enough,Wedge told himself silently. "Okay," he said aloud. "Let's do it."

 A new set of drive trails had appeared near the Star Destroyer's docking bay: the second wave of TIE fighters had launched. That was going to be trouble down the line; but for the moment, the X-wings had this batch of Imperials outnumbered. And the Imperials knew it. They were spreading out, trying to draw their attackers apart where they couldn't cover each other. Wedge did a quick evaluation of the situation "All X-wings: we'll do a one-on-one," he said. "Choose your target and go."

 Closer now, he could see that two of the Imperial starfighters were the faster and more advanced TIE interceptors. Picking one of them for himself he broke formation and headed after it.

 Whatever erosion the Empire had experienced in the way of ships and trained personnel over the past five years, it was quickly clear that their starfighter training program hadn't suffered a lot. Wedge's target TIE interceptor slipped adroitly away from his initial attack, doing a sideways skid that simultaneously braked him out of the X-wing's way and swiveled his lasers around to track along its flight vector. Wedge threw the X-wing into a drop loop, wincing as the other's shot came close enough to trigger the starboard engines' heat sensors, and turned sharply to starboard. He braced himself for a second shot, hut it didn't come. Bringing the X-wing out of its combination loop/turn, he looked around for his opponent.

 "Watch your back, Rogue Leader!" the voice of Rogue Three snapped in his ear; ana Wedge again threw the X-wing into a drop loop just as another laser blast sizzled past his canopy. Not only had the Imperial not been fooled by Wedge's corkscrew maneuver, he'd even managed to follow him through it. "He's still with you," Rogue Three confirmed. "Go evasiveI can be there in a minute."

 "Don't bother," Wedge told him. Through the spinning sky outside his canopy he'd caught a glimpse of another Imperial moving past him to portside. Hauling hard on his controls, he broke out of his loop and drove directly toward it. The TIE fighter jerked slightly as its pilot suddenly became aware of the threat bearing down on him and tried to veer out of the way.

 Which was exactly what Wedge had counted on. Ducking beneath the TIE fighter, he threw the X-wing into a upward rolling turn, swinging perilously close to the Imperial's canopy and bringing his nose around to point back the way he'd come.

 The TIE interceptor, which had instinctively swerved off Wedge's tail to keep from ramming one of his own ships, was caught flat-footed. A single point-blank blast from the X-wing's lasers blew it out of the sky.

 "Nice flying, Rogue Leader," Gold Leader commented. "My turn."

 Wedge understood. Throwing power to his drive, he shot away from the TIE fighter he'd used for cover, getting clear just as Gold Leader's lasers caught it. "How we doing?" Wedge asked as his canopy lit up briefly with the reflected light of the explosion.

 "We're done," Gold Leader said.

 "We are?" Wedge frowned, bringing his X-wing around in a wide circle. Sure enough, the only things visible nearby were X-wings. Apart from expanding clouds of glowing debris, of course. "What about the drop ships?" he asked.

 "I don't know," the other admitted. "Gold Three, Gold Four; report."

 "We got six of them, Gold Leader," a new voice said. "I don't know what happened to the seventh."

 Wedge swore under his breath, switching comm channels as he glanced back toward the Star Destroyer. The new group of TIE fighters was coming up fast. No time for him to do anything for theKatana except maybe warn them. "Luke? You've got company coming."

 "We know," Luke's tight voice came back. "They're already here."

 

 They came out of the drop ship with lasers blazing, laying down a heavy cover fire as they moved toward the two sets of blast doors that led forward from the docking bay. Luke couldn't see them from where he was, any more than he could see Han's group waiting silently for them behind the edge of the portside blast doors. But he could hear the Imperials' blaster fire, and he could sense their approach.

 And there was something about that sense that set the back of his neck tingling. Something not quite right about them

 His comlink beeped. "Luke?" Lando's voice came softly. "They're coming. You ready?"

 Luke closed down his lightsaber and gave his handiwork one last check. A large section of the corridor's ceiling was now hanging perilously by a few strands of metal, ready to come crashing down at the slightest provocation. Beyond it, two sections of the wall were similarly boobytrapped. "All set," he told Lando.

 "Okay. Here goes

 And suddenly, the pitch of a different class of weapons joined the cacophony as the defenders opened up on the Imperials. For a few seconds the two groups of weapons vied with each other. Then, with a screech of strained metal, the sounds were cut off.

 The four techs were the first around the corner to where Luke waited, their faces showing the mixture of fear and nervousness and exhilaration of men who've just survived their first firelight. Lando was next, with Han and Chewbacca bringing up the rear. "Ready?" Han asked Luke.

 "Yes." Luke indicated the rigged sections of ceiling and wall. "It's not going to hold them for long, though."

 "Doesn't have to," Han grunted. "As long as it takes a few of them out it's worth it. Let's go."

 "Hold it," Luke said, stretching out with the Force. Those strangely disturbing minds "They're splitting up," he told Han. "About half are still at the portside blast doors; the other half are going to the starboard Operations section."

 "Trying to flank us," Han nodded. "Lando, how well is that area sealed off?"

 "Not very," Lando admitted. "The blast doors from the docking bay itself should hold for a while, but there's a whole maze of storage rooms and maintenance shops off of Operations that they can probably get back to the main starboard corridor from. There were too many doors for us to close it all off."

 From the blast doors they'd just left came the dull thud of a shaped charge. "So this group keeps us busy thinking they're all here, while the other one tries to get behind us," Han decided. "Well, we didn't want to hold the whole corridor, anyway. Chewie, you and Lando take the others and fall back toward the bridge. Take out as many of them as you can on the way. Luke and I'll go across to starboard and see if we can slow that batch down a little."

 Chewbacca growled an acknowledgment and headed oft' the it)ur tech men already on their way. "Good luck" Lando said, and followed.

 Han looked at Luke. "Still in just the two groups?"

 "Yes," Luke said, straining to locate the enemy. The strange feeling was still there

 "Okay. Let's go."

 They set off, Han leading the way down a narrow cross corridor lined with the kind of closely spaced doors that indicated crew quarters. "Where are we going?" Luke asked as they hurried along.

 "Number two starboard weapons blister," Han said. "Should be something nasty there we can use to flood the main corridor withturbolaser coolant or something."

 "Unless they have life-support gear, Luke pointed out.

 "They don't," Han said. "At least, they weren't wearing any when they charged us. They had standard trooper air filters, but if we fill the whole corridor with coolant those won't do them much good. You never know," he added reflectively. "The coolant might be flammable, too."

 "Too bad theKatana fleet wasn't made up of Star Galleons," Luke said, reaching out again toward the enemy. As near as he could tell, they were in the maze of rooms Lando had mentioned, working their way around toward the main starboard corridor. "We really could have used those anti-intruder defenses they come equipped with."

 "If this was a Star Galleon, the Empire wouldn't be so anxious to take it away from us in one piece," Han retorted. "They'd just blow it out of the sky and be done with it."

 Luke grimaced. "Right."

 They reached the main starboard corridor; and they were halfway across it when Han suddenly stopped short. "What in blazes?"

 Luke turned to look. Ten meters down the corridor, sitting in a patch of darkness beneath burned-out light panels, was a large metal box resting at a tilt on a half-seen tangle of cables and struts. Twin blaster cannon protruded from beneath a narrow viewport; the corridor walls immediately around it were warped and blackened, with a half dozen good-sized holes visible. "What is it?" he asked.

 "Looks like a scaled-down version of a scout walker," Han said. "Let's go take a look."

 "Wonder what it's doing here," Luke said as they walked toward it. The floor beneath their feet was noticeably warped, too. Whoever had been in there firing had done a thorough job of it.

 "Probably someone brought it out of storage during the hive virus thing that killed everyone," Han suggested. "Either trying to protect the bridge or else just gone crazy themselves."

 Luke nodded, shivering at the thought. "It must have been a real trick to get it in here in the first place."

 "Well, we're sure not going to get it out," Han said, peering down at the tangle of debris where the walker's right leg had been. He cocked an eyebrow at Luke. "Unless?"

 Luke swallowed. Master Yoda had lifted his X-wing out of a Dagobah swamp oncebut Master Yoda had been far stronger in the Force than Luke was. "Let's find out," he said. Taking a deep breath, clearing his mind, he raised his hand and reached out with the Force.

 The walker didn't even quiver. Luke tried again; and again. But it was no use. Either the machine was wedged too tightly against walls and ceiling to move, or Luke simply didn't have the strength to lift it.

 "Well, never mind," Han said, glancing back down the corridor. "It would have been nice to have it mobilewe could have put it in that big monitor room behind the bridge and picked off anyone who came close. But we can use it here, too. Let's see if we can get in."

 Holstering his blaster, he climbed up the single remaining leg. "They're getting closer," Luke warned him, looking uneasily back down the corridor. "Another couple of minutes and they'll be in sight."

 "Better get around behind me," Han said. He was at the walker's side door now, and with a grunt be pulled it open

 "What?" Luke asked sharply as Han's sense abruptly changed.

 "You don't want to know," Han told him grimly. Visibly bracing himself, he ducked down and climbed inside. "Still has power," he called, his voice echoing slightly. "Let's see"

 Above Luke, the blaster cannon traversed a few degrees. "Still has maneuverability," Han added with satisfaction. "Great."

 Luke had made it to the top of the leg now, easing carefully past sharp edges. Whoever the walker had been fighting against had put up a good fight. The back of his mind tingled "They're coming," he hissed to Han, slipping off the leg and landing silently on the deck. Dropping into a crouch, he peered back through the gap between the angled leg and the main part of the walker, hoping the darkness would be adequate to conceal him.

 He'd gotten out of sight just in time. The Imperials were moving swiftly toward them down the corridor, spread out in a properly cautious military formation. The two point men paused as they caught sight of the broken walker, probably trying to decide whether to risk a straight advance or to give up the element of surprise by laying down cover fire. Whoever was in charge opted for a compromise; the point men glided forward while the rest of the party dropped prone or hugged the corridor walls.

 Han let them get right up to the base of the walker. Then, swiveling the blaster cannon over their heads, he opened up on the main group.

 The answering fire came instantly; but it was no contest at all. Han systematically raked the walls and the floor, driving back the handful who'd been fortunate enough to have a nearby doorway to duck into and annihilating those who hadn't. The two point men reacted instantly, one of them firing upward toward the viewport, the other scrambling up the leg toward the side door.

 He reached the top to find Luke waiting for him. His companion down below got three shots offall deflectedbefore the lightsaber found him, too.

 Abruptly, the blaster cannon stopped firing. Luke glanced down the corridor, reaching out with the Force. "There are still three of them left," he warned as Han opened the walker's door and squeezed out.

 "Leave 'em," Han said, climbing carefully down the back of the damaged leg and consulting his chrono. "We need to get back to Lando and Chewie." He threw Luke a mirthless grin. "Besides, the actuator crystals just burned up. Let's get going before they figure that out."

 

 The first wave of TIE fighters had been destroyed, as had all but one of the drop ships. The Rebel Escort Frigate and its X-wings were now engaged with Squadrons One and Three, and appeared to be holding their own quite well.

 And Captain Brandei was no longer smiling.

 "Squadron Four launching now," Starfighter Control announced. "Squadrons Five and Six are awaiting your orders."

 "Order them to stand by," Brandei instructed. Not that he had much choice in the matter. Five and Six were recon and bomber squadronsuseful enough in their particular areas of expertise, but not in straight battle against Rebel X-wings. "Anything further on thePeremptory ?"

 "No, sir. The last report from theChimaera before our shields went uphad their ETA as approximately 1519."

 Only about seven minutes away. But battles had been lost in less time than that; and from the look of things, this could very well become one of them.

 Which left Brandei only one real option. Much as he disliked the idea of moving into range of that Dreadnaught's turbolasers, he was going to have to take the aJudicatorinto combat. "All ahead," he ordered the helm. "Shields at full strength; turbolaser batteries stand ready. And inform the leader of the boarding party that I want that Dreadnaught in Imperial handsnow ."

 "Yes, sir." There was a dull roar through the deck as the sublight drive came up to power And, without warning, the roar was joined by the hooting of the ship's alarms. "Bandits coming out of lightspeed astern," the sensor officer snapped. "Eighteen craftfreighter class and smaller. They're attacking."

 Brandei swore viciously as he punched for the appropriate display. They weren't Rebel vessels, not this group, and he wondered who in the Empire they could be. But no matter. "Come around to two-seven-one," he ordered the helm. "Bring aft turbolasers to bear on the bandits. And launch Squadron Six."

 Whoever they were, he would soon teach them not to meddle in Imperial business. As to their identity well, Intelligence would be able to ascertain that later from the wreckage.

 

 "Watch it, Mara," Aves's voice warned over the comm. "They're trying to come about. And we've got TIE fighters on the way."

 "Right," Mara said, permitting herself a sardonic smile. For all the good that would do. The bulk of the Star Destroyer's starfighters were already engaged with the New Republic forces, which meant that all Karrde's people were likely to get would be recon ships and bombers. Nothing they couldn't handle. "Dankin, Torveswing down to intercept.

 The two pilots acknowledged, and she returned her attention to the inconspicuous spot beneath the Star Destroyer's central sublight drive nozzle where her Z-95's lasers were currently blasting away. Beneath the shielding at that point was a critical part of the lower-aft sensor package. If she could take it out, she and the others would have free run of the relatively undefended underside of the huge ship.

 With a sudden puff of vaporized metal and plastic, the lasers punched through. "Got it," she told Aves. "Lower-aft-central sector is now blind."

 "Good job," Aves said. "Everyone: move in."

 Mara pulled the Z-95 away, glad to be leaving the heat and radiation of the drive emissions. TheWild Karrde and other freighters could handle the job of tearing into the Star Destroyer's outer hull now; her small starfighter would be better utilized in keeping the TIE fighters away from them.

 But first, she had enough time to check in. "Jade calling Karrde," she said into the comm. "You there?"

 "Right here, Mara, thank you," came a familiar voice; Mara felt a little of her tension drain away.Right here, thank you, meant everything was fine aboard the New Republic ship.

 Or as fine as could be expected while facing an Imperial Star Destroyer. "What's the situation?" she asked.

 "We've taken some damage, but we seem to be holding our own," he said. "There's a small tech team aboard theKatana and they have the turbolasers operational, which may account for the Star Destroyer's reluctance to move any closer. No doubt they'll overcome their shyness eventually."

 "They've overcome it now," Mara said. "The ship was under power when we arrived. And we're not going to be able to distract them for long."

 "Mara, this is Leia Organa Solo," a new voice came on the comm. "We've got a Star Cruiser on its way."

 "The Imperials will have backup coming, too," Mara said flatly. "Let's not be heroic to the point of stupidity, okay? Get your people off theKatana and get out of here."

 "We can't," Organa Solo said. "The Imperials have boarded. Our people are cut off from the docking bay."

 Mara looked across at the dark bulk of the Dreadnaught, lit only by its own running lights and the flickers of reflected light from the battle raging near and around it. "Then you'd better write them off," she said. "The Imperials aren't likely to be far away-their backup will get here long before yours does."

 And as if cued by her words, there was a flicker of pseudomotion off to her left; and abruptly three Dreadnaughts in triangular formation appeared. "Mara!" Aves snapped.

 "I see them," Mara said as a second triad flickered in behind and above the first. "That's it, Karrde. Get out of there"

 "Attention, New Republic forces," a new voice boomed over the channel. "This is Senator Garm Bel Iblis aboard the warshipPeregrine . May I offer our assistance?"

 

 Leia stared at the comm speaker, a strange combination of surprise, hope, and disbelief flooding in on her. She glanced up at Karrde, caught his eye. He shrugged slightly, shook his head. "I'd heard he was dead," he murmured.

 Leia swallowed. So had she but itwas Bel Iblis's voice, all right. Or else an excellent copy. "Garm, this is Leia Organa Solo," she said.

 "Leia!" Bel Iblis said. "It's been a long time, hasn't it?

 I didn't expect. you to be out here personally. Though perhaps I should have. Was all this your idea?"

 Leia frowned out the viewport. "I don't understand what you meanby all this. What are you doing here, anyway?"

 "Captain Solo sent my assistant the coordinates and asked us to come along as backup," Bel Iblis said, a note of caution creeping into his voice. "I assumed it was at your request."

 Leia smiled tightly. She should have guessed. "Han's memory sort of slips sometimes," she said. "Though to be honest, we haven't had much time since we got back to compare notes."

 "I see," Bel Iblis said slowly. "So it wasn't actually an official request from the New Republic?"

 "It wasn't, but it is now," Leia assured him. "On behalf of the New Republic, I hereby ask for your assistance." She looked over at Virgilio. "Log that, please, Captain."

 "Yes, Councilor," Virgilio acknowledged. "And speaking for myself, Senator Bel Iblis, I'm delighted to have you along."

 "Thank you, Captain," Bel Iblis said, and in her mind's eye Leia could see the other's famous smile. "Let's do some damage, shall we?Peregrine out."

 The six Dreadnaughts had moved into encirclement formation around the Star Destroyer now, smothering it with a flood of ion cannon fire and ignoring the increasingly sporadic turbolaser blasts raking them in return.

 "Mara's right, though," Karrde said, stepping close to Leia. "As soon as we can get the tech team off that ship, we'd better get them and run."

 Leia shook her head. "We can't just leave theKatana fleet to the Empire."

 Karrde snorted. "I take it you haven't had a chance to count how many Dreadnaughts are left out there."

 Leia frowned. "No. Why?"

 "I did a scan," Karrde said grimly. "Earlier, when you were arguing with Fey'lya. Out of the original two hundredKatana ships there are fifteen left."

 Leia stared at him. "Fifteen?" she breathed.

 Karrde nodded. "I'm afraid I underestimated the Grand Admiral, Councilor," he said, an edge of bitterness seeping in beneath the studied urbanity of his voice. "I knew that once he had the location of the fleet he would start moving the ships away from here. But I didn't expect him to get the location from Hoffner this quickly."

 Leia shivered. She'd undergone an Imperial interrogation herself once. Years later, the memory was still vivid. "I wonder if there's anything left of him."

 "Save your sympathy," Karrde advised. "In retrospect, it seems unlikely that Thnvn needed to bother with anything so uncivilized as coercion. For Hoffner to have talked so freely implies the Grand Admiral simply applied a large infusion of cash."

 Leia gazed out at the battle, the dark feeling of failure setting over her. They'd lost. After all their efforts, they'd lost.

 She took a deep breath, running through the Jedi relaxation exercises. Yes, they'd lost. But it vas just a battle, not the war. The Empire might ha'e taken the Dark Force, but recruiting and training crewers to man all those Dreadnaughts would take years. A lot could happen in that time. "You're right," she told Karrde. "We'd do best to cut our losses. Captain Virgilio, as soon as those TIE fighters have been neutralized I want a landing party sent to theKatana to assist our tech team there."

 There was no reply. "Captain?"

 Virgilio was staring out the bridge viewport, his face carved from stone. "Too late, Councilor," he said quietly.

 Leia turned to look. There, moving toward the besieged Imperial ship, a second Star Destroyer had suddenly emerged from hyperspace.

 The Imperials' backup had arrived.

 

 "Pull out!" Aves shouted, his voice starting to sound ragged. "All ships, pull out! Second Star Destroyer in system."

 The last word was half drowned out by the clang of the Z-95's proximity warning as something got entirely too close. Mara threw the little ship into a sideways skid, just in time to get out of a TIE fighter's line of fire. "Pull out where?" she demanded, turning her skid into a barely controlled spin that had the effect of killing her forward velocity. Her attacker, perhaps made overconfident by the appearance of the backup force, roared by too fast for more than a wild shot in her direction. Coolly, Mara blew him out of the sky. "In case you've forgotten, some of us don't have enough computing power aboard to calculate a safe hyperspace jump."

 "I'll feed you the numbers," Aves said. "Karrde"

 "I agree," Karrde's voice came from the Escort Frigate. "Get out of here."

 Mara clenched her teeth, glancing up at the second Star Destroyer. She hated to turn tail and run, but she knew they were right. Bel Iblis had shifted three of his ships to meet the new threat, but even equipped with ion cannon, three Dreadnaughts couldn't hold down a Star Destroyer for long. If they didn't disengage soon, they might not get another chance

 Abruptly, her danger sense tingled. Again she threw the Z-95 into a skid; but this time she was too late. The ship lurched hard, and from behind her came the hissing scream of superheated metal vaporizing into space. "I'm hit!" she snapped, one hand automatically slapping cutoff switches as the other grabbed for her flight suit's helJet seals and fastened them in place. Just in time; a second hiss, cut off almost before it began, announced the failure of cabin integrity. "Power lost, air lost. Ejecting now."

 She reached for the eject loop and paused. By chanceor perhaps lastsecond instinct her crippled fighter was aimed almost directly at the first Star Destroyer s hangar entry port. If she could coax a little more power out of the auxiliary maneuvering system 

 It took more than a little coaxing, but when she finally gripped the eject loop again she had the satisfaction of knowing that even in death the Z-95 would take a minor bit of revenge on the Empire's war machine. Not much, but a little.

 She pulled down on the loop, and an instant later was slammed hard into her seat as explosive bolts blew the canopy clear and catapulted her out of the ship. She got a quick glimpse of the Star Destroyer's portside edge, an even quicker glimpse of a TIE fighter whipping past

 And suddenly there was an agonized squeal from the ejection seat's electronics, and the violent crackle of arcing circuits and with a horrible jolt Mara realized that she had made what might very well be the last mistake of her life. Intent on aiming her crippled Z-95 at the Star Destroyer's hangar bay, she had drifted too close to the giant ship and ejected directly into the path of the Dreadnaughts' ion beam bombardment.

 And in that single crackle of tortured electronics she had lost everything. Her comm, her lights, her limited maneuvering jets, her life support regulator, her emergency beacons.

 Everything.

 For a second her thoughts flickered to Skywalker. He'd been lost in deep space, too, awhile back. But she'd had a reason to find him. No one had a similar reason to find her.

 A flaming TIE fighter roared past her and exploded. A large piece of shrapnel glanced off the ceramic armor that wrapped partially around her shoulders, slamming her head hard against the side of the headrest.

 And as she fell into the blackness, she saw the Emperor's face before her. And knew that she had again failed him.

 

 They were approaching the monitor anteroom just behind theKatana 's bridge when Luke abruptly jerked. "What?" Han snapped, looking quickly around down the corridor behind them.

 "It's Mara," the other said, his face tight. "She's in trouble."

 "Hit?" Han asked.

 "Hit andand lost," Luke said, forehead straining in concentration. "She must have run into one of the ion beams."

 The kid was looking like he'd just lost his best friend, instead of someone who wanted to kill him. Han thought about pointing that out, decided at the last second they had more immediate things to worry about. Probably just one of those crazy Jedi things that never made sense anyway. "Well, we can't help her now," he said, starting forward again. "Come on.

 Both the starboard and port main corridors fed into the monitor anteroom, from which a single set of blast doors led the rest of the way forward into the bridge proper. Lando and Chewbacca were at opposite sides of the port corridor entrance way as Han and Luke arrived, huddling back from a barrage of laser fire and occasionally risking a quick shot know. "What've you got, Lando?" Han asked as he and Luke joined them.

 "Nothing good, buddy," Lando grunted back. "There are at least ten of then' left. Shen and Tomrus were both hitShen will probably die if we don't get him to a medic droid in the next hour or so. Anselm and Kline are taking care of them inside the bridge."

 "We did a little better, but we've still got a couple of them coming up behind us," Han told him, doing a quick assesment of the rows of monitor consoles in the anteroom. They would provide reasonable cover, hilt given the layout, the defenders wouldn't be able to retreat farther without opening themselves to enemy fire. "I don't think four of us can hold this place," he decided. "We'd better pull back to the bridge."

 "From which there's nowhere else to go, Lando pointed out. "I trust you considered that part?"

 Beside him, Han felt Luke brace himself. "All right," Luke said. "Into the bridge, all of you. I'll handle this."

 Lando threw him a look. "You'll what?"

 "I'll handle it," Luke repeated. With a sharpsnap-hiss he ignited his lightsaber. "Get goingI know what I'm doing."

 "Come on," Han seconded. He didn't know what Luke had in mind, but something about the kid's face suggested it wouldn't be a good idea to argue. "We can backstop him from inside."

 A minute later they were set: Han and Lando just inside the bridge blast doors, Chewbacca a few meters farther in under cover of an engineering console, Luke standing alone in the archway with lightsaber humming. It took another minute for the Imperials to realize that they had the corridors to themselves; but once they did they moved swiftly. Cover fire began ricocheting around the monitor consoles, and as it did so the Imperials began diving one by one through the two corridor archways into the anteroom, taking cover behind the long consoles and adding their contribution to the laser fire storm.

 Trying not to wince back from the attack, Han kept up his own fire, knowing full well that he wasn't doing much more than making noise. Luke's lightsaber flashed like something alive and hungry, deflecting the bolts that came too close. So far the kid didn't seem to have been hit  but Han knew that it couldn't last. As soon as the Imperials stopped laying down random cover fire and started concentrating on their aim, there would be too many shots for even a Jedi to stay clear of. Gritting his teeth, wishing he knew what Luke had in mind, he kept shooting.

 "Ready!" Luke shouted over the screaming of the bolts and even as Han wondered what he was supposed to be ready for, the kid took a step back and threw his lightsaber to the side. It spiraled across the anteroom, spun into the wall

 And with a crack like thunder, sliced the anteroom open to space.

 Luke leaped backwards, barely making it into the bridge before the blast doors slammed shut against the explosive decompression. Alarms whistled for a moment until Chewbacca shut them oft, and for another minute Han could hear the thudding of laser fire as the doomed Imperials fired uselessly at the blast doors.

 And then the firing trailed off into silence and it was all over.

 Luke was already at the main viewport, gazing out at the battle taking place outside. "Take it easy, Luke," Han advised, holstering his blaster and coming up behind him. "We're out of the fight."

 "We can't be," Luke insisted, his artificial right hand opening and closing restlessly. Maybe remembering Myrkr, and that long trek with Mara across the forest. "We've got to do something to help. The Imperials will kill everyone if we don't."

 "We can't fire, and we can't maneuver," Han growled, fighting back his own feeling of helplessness. Leia was on that Escort Frigate out there "What's left?"

 Luke waved a hand helplessly. "I don't know," he conceded. "You're supposed to be the clever one.You think of something."

 "Yeah," Han muttered, looking around the bridge. "Sure. I'm supposed to just wave my hands and"

 He stopped shortand felt a slow, lopsided smile spread across his face. "Chewie, Landoget over there to those sensor displays," he ordered, looking down at the console in front of him. Not the right one. "Luke, help me findnever mind; here it is."

 "Here what is?" Lando asked, stepping in front of the display Han had indicated.

 "Think about it a minute," Han said, glancing over the controls. Good; everything still seemed to be engaged. He just hoped it all still worked. "Where are we, anyway?" he added, stepping over to the helm console and activating it.

 "We're in the middle of nowhere," Lando said with strained patience. "And fiddling with that helm isn't going to get us anywhere."

 "You're right," Han agreed, smiling tightly. "It's not going to get us anywhere."

 Lando stared at himand slowly, a smile of his own appeared. "Right," he said slyly. "Right. This is theKatana fleet. And we're aboard theKatana ."

 "You got it," Han told him. Taking a deep breath, mentally crossing his fingers, he eased power to the drive.

 TheKatana didn't move, of course. But the whole reason the entireKatana fleet had disappeared together in the first place

 "Got one," Lando called out, hunching over his sensor display. "Bearing forty-three mark twenty."

 "Just one?" Han asked.

 "Just one," Lando confirmed. "Count your blessingsafter this much time we're lucky to have even one ship whose engines still work."

 "Let's hope they stay working," Han grunted. "Give me an intercept course for that second Star Destroyer."

 "Uh" Lando frowned. "Come around fifteen degrees portside and down a hair."

 "Right." Carefully, Han made the necessary course change. It was a strange feeling to be flying another ship by slave-rig remote control. "How's that?" he asked Lando.

 "Looks good," Lando confirmed. "Give it a little more power."

 "The fire control monitors aren't working," Luke warned, stepping to Han's side. "I don't know if you're going to be able to fire accurately without them."

 "I'm not even going to try," Han told him grimly. "Lando?"

 "Shift a little more to portside," Lando directed. "A little more that's it." He looked up at Han. "You're lined up perfectly."

 "Here goes," Han said; and threw the throttle control wide open.

 There was no way the Star Destroyer could have missed seeing the Dreadnaught bearing down on it, of course. But with its electronic and control systems still being scrambled by Bel Iblis's ion attack, there was also no way for it to move out of the way in time.

 Even from theKatana 's distance, the impact and explosion were pretty spectacular. Han watched the expanding fireball fade slowly, and then turned to Luke. "Okay," he said. "Nowwe're out of the fight."

 

 Through theJudicator 's side viewport Captain Brandei watched in stunned disbelief as thePeremptory died its fiery death. Noit couldn't be. It simply couldn't. Not an Imperial Star Destroyer. Not the mightiest ship in the Empire's fleet.

 Thecrack of a shot against the bridge deflector screen snapped him out of it. "Report," he snapped.

 "One of the enemy Dreadnaughts seems to have been damaged in thePeremptory 's explosion," the sensor officer reported. "The other two are on their way back here."

 To reinforce the three still blasting away with their ion cannon. Brandei gave the tactical display a quick check; but it was a meaningless exercise. He knew full well what their only course was. "Recall all remaining fighters," he ordered. "We'll make the jump to lightspeed as soon as they're aboard."

 "Yes sir."

 And as the bridge crew moved to comply, Brandei permitted himself a tight smile. Yes, they'd lost this one. But it was just a battle, not the war. They'd be back soon enoughand when they did, it would be with the Dark Force and Grand Admiral Thrawn to command it.

 So he would leave the Rebels to enjoy their victory here. It might well be their last.

 

 CHAPTER
29

 The repair party from theQuenfis got the anteroom hull breach patched in what was probably record time. The ship Luke had requested was waiting for him in the docking bay, and he was out in space again barely an hour after the destruction f the second Star Destroyer and the retreat of the first.

 Locating a single inert ejection seat among all the debris of battle had been a nearly hopeless task for Karrde's people. For a Jedi, it was no trick at all.

 Mara was unconscious when they found her, both from a dangerously depleted air supply and from what was probably a mild concussion. Aves got her aboard theWild Karrde and set off at near-reckless speed toward the medical facilities of the Star Cruiser which had finally arrived. Luke saw them safely aboard, then headed back toward theKatana and the transport he and the rest of his team would be returning to Coruscant by.

 Wondering why it had been so important for him to rescue Mara in the first place.

 He didn't know. There were lots of rationalizations he could come up with, from simple gratitude for her assistance in the battle all the way up to the saving of lives being a natural part of a Jedi's duty. But none of them was more than simply a rationalization. All he knew for certain was that he had had to do it.

 Maybe it was the guidance of the Force. Maybe it was just one last gasp of youthful idealism and navet.

 From the board in front of him, the comm pinged. "Luke?"

 "Yes, Han, what is it?"

 "Get back here to theKatana . Right away."

 Luke looked out his canopy at the dark ship ahead, a shiver running through him. Han's voice had been that of someone walking through a graveyard"What is it?"

 "Trouble," the other said. "I know what the Empire's up to now. And it's not good."

 Luke swallowed. "I'll be right there."

 

 "So," Thrawn said, his glowing eyes blazing with cold fire as he looked up from theJudicator 's report. "Thanks to your insistence on delaying me, we've lost thePeremptory . I trust you're satisfied."

 C'baoth met the gaze evenly. "Don't blame the incompetence of your would-be conquerors on me," he said, his voice as icy as Thrawn's. "Or perhaps it wasn't incompetence, but the skill of the Rebellion. Perhaps it would be you lying dead now if theChimaera had gone instead."

 Thrawn's face darkened. Pellaeon eased a half step closer to the Grand Admiral, moving a little farther into the protective sphere of the ysalamir beside the command chair, and braced himself for the explosion.

 But Thrawn had better control than that. "Why are you here?" be asked instead.

 C'baoth smiled and turned deliberately away. "You've made many promises to me since you first arrived on Wayland, Grand Admiral Thrawn," he said, pausing to peer at one of the hologram sculptures scattered around the room. "I'm here to make sure those promises are kept."

 "And how do you intend to do that?"

 "By making certain that I'm too important to be, shall we say, conveniently forgotten," C'baoth said. "I'm hereby informing you, therefore, that I will be returning to Wayland and will be assuming command of your Mount Tantiss project."

 Pellaeon felt his throat tighten. "The Mount Tantiss project?" Thrawn asked evenly.

 "Yes," C'baoth said, smiling again as his eyes flicked to Pellaeon. "Oh, I know about it, Captain. Despite your petty efforts to conceal the truth from me."

 "We wished to spare you unnecessary discomfort," Thrawn assured him. "Unpleasant memories, for example, that the project might bring to mind."

 C'baoth studied him. "Perhaps you did," he conceded with only a touch of sarcasm. "If that was truly your motive, I thank you. But the time for such things has passed. I have grown in power and ability since I left Wayland, Grand Admiral Thrawn. I no longer need you to care for my sensitivities."

 He drew himself up to his full height; and when he spoke again, his voice boomed and echoed throughout the room. "I am C'baoth; Jedi Master. The Force which binds the galaxy together is my servant."

 Slowly, Thrawn rose to his feet. "And you are my servant, he said.

 C'baoth shook his head. "Not anymore, Grand Admiral Thrawn. The circle has closed. The Jedi will rule again."

 "Take care, C'baoth," Thrawn warned. "Posture all you wish. But never forget that even you are not indispensable to the Empire."

 C'baoth's bushy eyebrows liftedand the smile which creased his face sent an icy shiver through Pellaeon's chest. It was the same smile he remembered from Wayland.

 The smile that had first convinced him that C'baoth was indeed insane.

 "On the contrary," the Jedi Master said softly. "As of now, I am all that isnot indispensable to the Empire."

 He lifted his gaze to the stars displayed on the room's walls. "Come," he said. "Let us discuss the new arrangement of our Empire."

 

 Luke looked down at the bodies of the Imperial troops who had died in his sudden decompression of theKatana 's bridge anteroom. Understanding at last why they'd felt strange to his mind. "I don't suppose there s any chance of a mistake," he heard himself say.

 Beside him, Han shrugged. "Leia's got them doing a genetic check. But I don't think so."

 Luke nodded, staring down at the lies laid out before him. Or rather, at the single face that was shared by all of the bodies.

 Clones.

 "So that's it," he said quietly. "Somewhere, the Empire's found a set of Spaarti cloning cylinders. And has gotten them working."

 "Which means it's not going to take them years to find and train crews for their new Dreadnaughts," Han said, his voice grim. "Maybe only a few months. Maybe not even that long."

 Luke took a deep breath. "I've got a really bad feeling about this, Han."

 "Yeah. Join the club."

 

 To Be Concluded...

 

 ISBN: 0-553-08574-3

 

 


